GLOUCESTER: Touch'd you the bastardy of Edward's children?

KING EDWARD IV: Take heed you dally not before your king; Lest he that is the supreme King of kings Confound your hidden falsehood, and award Either of you to be the other's end.

CLARENCE: I know it pleaseth neither of us well.

GLOUCESTER: In all which time you and your husband Grey Were factious for the house of Lancaster; And, Rivers, so were you. Was not your husband In Margaret's battle at Saint Alban's slain? Let me put in your minds, if you forget, What you have been ere now, and what you are; Withal, what I have been, and what I am.

COMINIUS: I have been i' the market-place; and, sir,'tis fit You make strong party, or defend yourself By calmness or by absence: all's in anger.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: The Lord protect him from that kingly title! Hath he set bounds betwixt their love and me? I am their mother; who should keep me from them?

First Citizen: Well, sir, what answer made the belly?

GLOUCESTER: Your eyes drop millstones, when fools' eyes drop tears: I like you, lads; about your business straight; Go, go, dispatch.

SICINIUS: You may, sir.

Messenger: What, ho! my lord!

Lieutenant: Fear not our care, sir. Visit our archive for more classic works.

COMINIUS: You shall not be The grave of your deserving; Rome must know The value of her own: 'twere a concealment Worse than a theft, no less than a traducement, To hide your doings; and to silence that, Which, to the spire and top of praises vouch'd, Would seem but modest: therefore, I beseech you In sign of what you are, not to reward What you have done--before our army hear me.

AEdile: I shall inform them.

VOLUMNIA: Ay, worthy Menenius; and with most prosperous approbation.

GENTLEMEN: Towards Chertsey, noble lord?

CORIOLANUS: I have deserved no better entertainment, In being Coriolanus.

MENENIUS: For that, being one o' the lowest, basest, poorest, Of this most wise rebellion, thou go'st foremost: Thou rascal, that art worst in blood to run, Lead'st first to win some vantage. But make you ready your stiff bats and clubs: Rome and her rats are at the point of battle; The one side must have bale. Hail, noble Marcius!

LADY ANNE: To take is not to give.

First Citizen: Well, I'll hear it, sir: yet you must not think to fob off our disgrace with a tale: but, an 't please you, deliver.

Messenger: My gracious lord, I'll tell him what you say.

Third Servingman: I would not be a Roman, of all nations; I had as lieve be a condemned man.

DUCHESS OF YORK: Was never mother had so dear a loss! Alas, I am the mother of these moans! Their woes are parcell'd, mine are general. She for an Edward weeps, and so do I; I for a Clarence weep, so doth not she: These babes for Clarence weep and so do I; I for an Edward weep, so do not they: Alas, you three, on me, threefold distress'd, Pour all your tears! I am your sorrow's nurse, And I will pamper it with lamentations.

QUEEN MARGARET: What were you snarling all before I came, Ready to catch each other by the throat, And turn you all your hatred now on me? Did York's dread curse prevail so much with heaven? That Henry's death, my lovely Edward's death, Their kingdom's loss, my woful banishment, Could all but answer for that peevish brat? Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven? Why, then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses! If not by war, by surfeit die your king, As ours by murder, to make him a king! Edward thy son, which now is Prince of Wales, For Edward my son, which was Prince of Wales, Die in his youth by like untimely violence! Thyself a queen, for me that was a queen, Outlive thy glory, like my wretched self! Long mayst thou live to wail thy children's loss; And see another, as I see thee now, Deck'd in thy rights, as thou art stall'd in mine! Long die thy happy days before thy death; And, after many lengthen'd hours of grief, Die neither mother, wife, nor England's queen! Rivers and Dorset, you were standers by, And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my son Was stabb'd with bloody daggers: God, I pray him, That none of you may live your natural age, But by some unlook'd accident cut off!

Lieutenant: Sir, I beseech you, think you he'll carry Rome?

GLOUCESTER: Look back, defend thee, here are enemies.

MENENIUS: He loves your people But tie him not to be their bedfellow. Worthy Cominius, speak. Nay, keep your place.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: O Dorset, speak not to me, get thee hence! Death and destruction dog thee at the heels; Thy mother's name is ominous to children. If thou wilt outstrip death, go cross the seas, And live with Richmond, from the reach of hell Go, hie thee, hie thee from this slaughter-house, Lest thou increase the number of the dead; And make me die the thrall of Margaret's curse, Nor mother, wife, nor England's counted queen.

COMINIUS: As I guess, Marcius, Their bands i' the vaward are the Antiates, Of their best trust; o'er them Aufidius, Their very heart of hope.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Cousins, indeed; and by their uncle cozen'd Of comfort, kingdom, kindred, freedom, life. Whose hand soever lanced their tender hearts, Thy head, all indirectly, gave direction: No doubt the murderous knife was dull and blunt Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart, To revel in the entrails of my lambs. But that still use of grief makes wild grief tame, My tongue should to thy ears not name my boys Till that my nails were anchor'd in thine eyes; And I, in such a desperate bay of death, Like a poor bark, of sails and tackling reft, Rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom.

First Senator: Amen, amen.

QUEEN MARGARET: I call'd thee then vain flourish of my fortune; I call'd thee then poor shadow, painted queen; The presentation of but what I was; The flattering index of a direful pageant; One heaved a-high, to be hurl'd down below; A mother only mock'd with two sweet babes; A dream of what thou wert, a breath, a bubble, A sign of dignity, a garish flag, To be the aim of every dangerous shot, A queen in jest, only to fill the scene. Where is thy husband now? where be thy brothers? Where are thy children? wherein dost thou, joy? Who sues to thee and cries 'God save the queen'? Where be the bending peers that flatter'd thee? Where be the thronging troops that follow'd thee? Decline all this, and see what now thou art: For happy wife, a most distressed widow; For joyful mother, one that wails the name; For queen, a very caitiff crown'd with care; For one being sued to, one that humbly sues; For one that scorn'd at me, now scorn'd of me; For one being fear'd of all, now fearing one; For one commanding all, obey'd of none. Thus hath the course of justice wheel'd about, And left thee but a very prey to time; Having no more but thought of what thou wert, To torture thee the more, being what thou art. Thou didst usurp my place, and dost thou not Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow? Now thy proud neck bears half my burthen'd yoke; From which even here I slip my weary neck, And leave the burthen of it all on thee. Farewell, York's wife, and queen of sad mischance: These English woes will make me smile in France.

LADY ANNE: And, by despairing, shouldst thou stand excused; For doing worthy vengeance on thyself, Which didst unworthy slaughter upon others.

MENENIUS: I'll undertake 't: I think he'll hear me. Yet, to bite his lip And hum at good Cominius, much unhearts me. He was not taken well; he had not dined: The veins unfill'd, our blood is cold, and then We pout upon the morning, are unapt To give or to forgive; but when we have stuff'd These and these conveyances of our blood With wine and feeding, we have suppler souls Than in our priest-like fasts: therefore I'll watch him Till he be dieted to my request, And then I'll set upon him.

BRUTUS: If it were so,--

CORIOLANUS: Well, mildly be it then. Mildly!

GLOUCESTER: Now, by Saint Paul, this news is bad indeed. O, he hath kept an evil diet long, And overmuch consumed his royal person: 'Tis very grievous to be thought upon. What, is he in his bed?

AUFIDIUS: O, doubt not that; I speak from certainties. Nay, more, Some parcels of their power are forth already, And only hitherward. I leave your honours. If we and Caius Marcius chance to meet, 'Tis sworn between us we shall ever strike Till one can do no more.

CORIOLANUS: Well, what then? what then?

CATESBY: What, my lord?

QUEEN ELIZABETH: A parlous boy: go to, you are too shrewd.

Citizens: Down with him, down with him!

VOLUMNIA: At thy choice, then: To beg of thee, it is my more dishonour Than thou of them. Come all to ruin; let Thy mother rather feel thy pride than fear Thy dangerous stoutness, for I mock at death With as big heart as thou. Do as thou list Thy valiantness was mine, thou suck'dst it from me, But owe thy pride thyself.

MARCIUS: Those are they That most are willing. If any such be here-- As it were sin to doubt--that love this painting Wherein you see me smear'd; if any fear Lesser his person than an ill report; If any think brave death outweighs bad life And that his country's dearer than himself; Let him alone, or so many so minded, Wave thus, to express his disposition, And follow Marcius. O, me alone! make you a sword of me? If these shows be not outward, which of you But is four Volsces? none of you but is Able to bear against the great Aufidius A shield as hard as his. A certain number, Though thanks to all, must I select from all: the rest Shall bear the business in some other fight, As cause will be obey'd. Please you to march; And four shall quickly draw out my command, Which men are best inclined.

AUFIDIUS: I was moved withal.

DUCHESS OF YORK: Why, my young cousin, it is good to grow.

PRINCE EDWARD: What say you, uncle?

MENENIUS: As Hercules Did shake down mellow fruit. You have made fair work!

COMINIUS: Aged sir, hands off.

SICINIUS: Yet your good will must have that thanks from Rome, after the measure As you intended well.

First Senator: Stay: whence are you?

All: Slain, sir, doubtless.

CORIOLANUS: By Jupiter! forgot. I am weary; yea, my memory is tired. Have we no wine here?

MENENIUS: That's worthily As any ear can hear. Come, let's not weep. If I could shake off but one seven years From these old arms and legs, by the good gods, I'ld with thee every foot.

MENENIUS: So did he me: and he no more remembers his mother now than an eight-year-old horse. The tartness of his face sours ripe grapes: when he walks, he moves like an engine, and the ground shrinks before his treading: he is able to pierce a corslet with his eye; talks like a knell, and his hum is a battery. He sits in his state, as a thing made for Alexander. What he bids be done is finished with his bidding. He wants nothing of a god but eternity and a heaven to throne in.

BISHOP OF ELY: Now in good time, here comes the duke himself.

BUCKINGHAM: I hear that news, my lord.

Boy: Then, grandam, you conclude that he is dead. The king my uncle is to blame for this: God will revenge it; whom I will importune With daily prayers all to that effect.

Senators, &C: We'll surety him.

First Soldier: Look, sir.

HASTINGS: I know they do; and I have well deserved it. Come on, come on; where is your boar-spear, man? Fear you the boar, and go so unprovided?

Second Servingman: Nay, I knew by his face that there was something in him: he had, sir, a kind of face, methought,--I cannot tell how to term it.

BRUTUS: The gods have well prevented it, and Rome Sits safe and still without him.

BUCKINGHAM: Your grace may do your pleasure. Visit our archive for more classic works.

CORIOLANUS: Whoever gave that counsel, to give forth The corn o' the storehouse gratis, as 'twas used Sometime in Greece,--

BRUTUS: Could you not have told him As you were lesson'd, when he had no power, But was a petty servant to the state, He was your enemy, ever spake against Your liberties and the charters that you bear I' the body of the weal; and now, arriving A place of potency and sway o' the state, If he should still malignantly remain Fast foe to the plebeii, your voices might Be curses to yourselves? You should have said That as his worthy deeds did claim no less Than what he stood for, so his gracious nature Would think upon you for your voices and Translate his malice towards you into love, Standing your friendly lord.

AUFIDIUS: My lords, when you shall know--as in this rage, Provoked by him, you cannot--the great danger Which this man's life did owe you, you'll rejoice That he is thus cut off. Please it your honours To call me to your senate, I'll deliver Myself your loyal servant, or endure Your heaviest censure.

Second Servingman: Where's Cotus? my master calls for him. Cotus!

SICINIUS: May they perceive's intent! He will require them, As if he did contemn what he requested Should be in them to give.

MENENIUS: Why, then you should discover a brace of unmeriting, proud, violent, testy magistrates, alias fools, as any in Rome.

Citizens: It shall be so, it shall be so; let him away: He's banish'd, and it shall be so.

MENENIUS: Very well: Could he say less?

AUFIDIUS: Why, noble lords, Will you be put in mind of his blind fortune, Which was your shame, by this unholy braggart, 'Fore your own eyes and ears?

CORIOLANUS: Well, I must do't: Away, my disposition, and possess me Some harlot's spirit! my throat of war be turn'd, Which quired with my drum, into a pipe Small as an eunuch, or the virgin voice That babies lulls asleep! the smiles of knaves Tent in my cheeks, and schoolboys' tears take up The glasses of my sight! a beggar's tongue Make motion through my lips, and my arm'd knees, Who bow'd but in my stirrup, bend like his That hath received an alms! I will not do't, Lest I surcease to honour mine own truth And by my body's action teach my mind A most inherent baseness.

MENENIUS: Because you talk of pride now,--will you not be angry?

MENENIUS: How! away!

First Servingman: Nay, it's no matter for that.

QUEEN MARGARET: Peace, master marquess, you are malapert: Your fire-new stamp of honour is scarce current. O, that your young nobility could judge What 'twere to lose it, and be miserable! They that stand high have many blasts to shake them; And if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.

GLOUCESTER: I cry thee mercy then, for I had thought That thou hadst call'd me all these bitter names.

First Murderer: Where is thy conscience now?

MARCIUS: Thy friend no less Than those she placeth highest! So, farewell.

BRUTUS: Come, sir, come, we know you well enough.

SICINIUS: Nay, pray, be patient: if you refuse your aid In this so never-needed help, yet do not Upbraid's with our distress. But, sure, if you Would be your country's pleader, your good tongue, More than the instant army we can make, Might stop our countryman.

First Murderer: Right, As snow in harvest. Thou deceivest thyself: 'Tis he that sent us hither now to slaughter thee.

KING EDWARD IV: Happy, indeed, as we have spent the day. Brother, we done deeds of charity; Made peace enmity, fair love of hate, Between these swelling wrong-incensed peers.

CORIOLANUS: Are these your herd? Must these have voices, that can yield them now And straight disclaim their tongues? What are your offices? You being their mouths, why rule you not their teeth? Have you not set them on?

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Windy attorneys to their client woes, Airy succeeders of intestate joys, Poor breathing orators of miseries! Let them have scope: though what they do impart Help not all, yet do they ease the heart.

MENENIUS: He's a bear indeed, that lives like a lamb. You two are old men: tell me one thing that I shall ask you.

SICINIUS: Are you mankind?

First Senator: Pray you, let's to him.

VALERIA: In truth, la, go with me; and I'll tell you excellent news of your husband.

CORIOLANUS: The word is 'mildly.' Pray you, let us go: Let them accuse me by invention, I Will answer in mine honour.

Messenger: The citizens of Corioli have issued, And given to Lartius and to Marcius battle: I saw our party to their trenches driven, And then I came away.

HASTINGS: False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse, Lest to thy harm thou move our patience. Visit our archive for more classic works.

Fourth Citizen: You have deserved nobly of your country, and you have not deserved nobly.

First Murderer: Make peace with God, for you must die, my lord.

KING RICHARD III: The advancement of your children, gentle lady.

BRUTUS: He's poor in no one fault, but stored with all.

Fourth Citizen: You have been a scourge to her enemies, you have been a rod to her friends; you have not indeed loved the common people.

First Citizen: First, you know Caius Marcius is chief enemy to the people.

SICINIUS: Why, so he did, I am sure.

LADY ANNE: Villain, thou know'st no law of God nor man: No beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity.

SICINIUS: Help, ye citizens!

KING RICHARD III: As I remember, Henry the Sixth Did prophesy that Richmond should be king, When Richmond was a little peevish boy. A king, perhaps, perhaps,--

BRUTUS: Good or bad?

LADY ANNE: It is a quarrel just and reasonable, To be revenged on him that slew my husband.

AUFIDIUS: Even so As with a man by his own alms empoison'd, And with his charity slain.

CLARENCE: O, do not slander him, for he is kind. Visit our archive for more classic works.

YORK: Of my kind uncle, that I know will give; And being but a toy, which is no grief to give.

COMINIUS: 'Twas from the canon.

PRINCE EDWARD: My Lord of York will still be cross in talk: Uncle, your grace knows how to bear with him.

Third Citizen: Then, masters, look to see a troublous world.

BRUTUS: Pray, let us go.

CORIOLANUS: Hear'st thou, Mars?

First Murderer: Ay, millstones; as be lesson'd us to weep.

BRAKENBURY: I beseech your graces both to pardon me; His majesty hath straitly given in charge That no man shall have private conference, Of what degree soever, with his brother.

Roman: I am a Roman; and my services are, as you are, against 'em: know you me yet?

Second Murderer: Whom thou wert sworn to cherish and defend.

BRUTUS: All tongues speak of him, and the bleared sights Are spectacled to see him: your prattling nurse Into a rapture lets her baby cry While she chats him: the kitchen malkin pins Her richest lockram 'bout her reechy neck, Clambering the walls to eye him: stalls, bulks, windows, Are smother'd up, leads fill'd, and ridges horsed With variable complexions, all agreeing In earnestness to see him: seld-shown flamens Do press among the popular throngs and puff To win a vulgar station: or veil'd dames Commit the war of white and damask in Their nicely-gawded cheeks to the wanton spoil Of Phoebus' burning kisses: such a pother As if that whatsoever god who leads him Were slily crept into his human powers And gave him graceful posture.

First Senator: Then, worthy Marcius, Attend upon Cominius to these wars.

CLARENCE: O, I have pass'd a miserable night, So full of ugly sights, of ghastly dreams, That, as I am a Christian faithful man, I would not spend another such a night, Though 'twere to buy a world of happy days, So full of dismal terror was the time!

VOLUMNIA: 'I would he had'! 'Twas you incensed the rabble: Cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth As I can of those mysteries which heaven Will not have earth to know.

DORSET: I will not rise, unless your highness grant.

BISHOP OF ELY: To-morrow, then, I judge a happy day.

First Senator: Your company to the Capitol; where, I know, Our greatest friends attend us.

SICINIUS: Have you collected them by tribes?

DERBY: We have not yet set down this day of triumph. To-morrow, in mine opinion, is too sudden; For I myself am not so well provided As else I would be, were the day prolong'd.

SICINIUS: This, as you say, suggested At some time when his soaring insolence Shall touch the people--which time shall not want, If he be put upon 't; and that's as easy As to set dogs on sheep--will be his fire To kindle their dry stubble; and their blaze Shall darken him for ever.

MENENIUS: This is good news: I will go meet the ladies. This Volumnia Is worth of consuls, senators, patricians, A city full; of tribunes, such as you, A sea and land full. You have pray'd well to-day: This morning for ten thousand of your throats I'd not have given a doit. Hark, how they joy!

Second Servingman: By my hand, I had thought to have strucken him with a cudgel; and yet my mind gave me his clothes made a false report of him.

MARCIUS: Then shall we hear their 'larum, and they ours. Now, Mars, I prithee, make us quick in work, That we with smoking swords may march from hence, To help our fielded friends! Come, blow thy blast. Tutus Aufidius, is he within your walls?

Second Murderer: A bloody deed, and desperately dispatch'd! How fain, like Pilate, would I wash my hands Of this most grievous guilty murder done!

First Citizen: Neighbour, well met: whither away so fast?

COMINIUS: He will shake Your Rome about your ears.

KING EDWARD IV: Have a tongue to doom my brother's death, And shall the same give pardon to a slave? My brother slew no man; his fault was thought, And yet his punishment was cruel death. Who sued to me for him? who, in my rage, Kneel'd at my feet, and bade me be advised Who spake of brotherhood? who spake of love? Who told me how the poor soul did forsake The mighty Warwick, and did fight for me? Who told me, in the field by Tewksbury When Oxford had me down, he rescued me, And said, 'Dear brother, live, and be a king'? Who told me, when we both lay in the field Frozen almost to death, how he did lap me Even in his own garments, and gave himself, All thin and naked, to the numb cold night? All this from my remembrance brutish wrath Sinfully pluck'd, and not a man of you Had so much grace to put it in my mind. But when your carters or your waiting-vassals Have done a drunken slaughter, and defaced The precious image of our dear Redeemer, You straight are on your knees for pardon, pardon; And I unjustly too, must grant it you But for my brother not a man would speak, Nor I, ungracious, speak unto myself For him, poor soul. The proudest of you all Have been beholding to him in his life; Yet none of you would once plead for his life. O God, I fear thy justice will take hold On me, and you, and mine, and yours for this! Come, Hastings, help me to my closet. Oh, poor Clarence!

GLOUCESTER: He hath, my lord.

SICINIUS: We are convented Upon a pleasing treaty, and have hearts Inclinable to honour and advance The theme of our assembly.

SICINIUS: Your Coriolanus Is not much miss'd, but with his friends: The commonwealth doth stand, and so would do, Were he more angry at it.

CORIOLANUS: What must I do?

GLOUCESTER: But you have all the vantage of her wrong. I was too hot to do somebody good, That is too cold in thinking of it now. Marry, as for Clarence, he is well repaid, He is frank'd up to fatting for his pains God pardon them that are the cause of it!

KING RICHARD III: What do you think?

COMINIUS: Come, come, we'll prompt you.

BUCKINGHAM: No, so God help me, they spake not a word; But, like dumb statues or breathing stones, Gazed each on other, and look'd deadly pale. Which when I saw, I reprehended them; And ask'd the mayor what meant this wilful silence: His answer was, the people were not wont To be spoke to but by the recorder. Then he was urged to tell my tale again, 'Thus saith the duke, thus hath the duke inferr'd;' But nothing spake in warrant from himself. When he had done, some followers of mine own, At the lower end of the hall, hurl'd up their caps, And some ten voices cried 'God save King Richard!' And thus I took the vantage of those few, 'Thanks, gentle citizens and friends,' quoth I; 'This general applause and loving shout Argues your wisdoms and your love to Richard:' And even here brake off, and came away.

BRUTUS: In this point charge him home, that he affects Tyrannical power: if he evade us there, Enforce him with his envy to the people, And that the spoil got on the Antiates Was ne'er distributed. What, will he come?

SICINIUS: This is clean kam.

BUCKINGHAM: My gracious sovereign?

SICINIUS: 'Tis he,'tis he: O, he is grown most kind of late.

First Roman: This will I carry to Rome.

Third Conspirator: The people will remain uncertain whilst 'Twixt you there's difference; but the fall of either Makes the survivor heir of all.

GLOUCESTER: My lord, will't please you pass along? Myself and my good cousin Buckingham Will to your mother, to entreat of her To meet you at the Tower and welcome you.

First Citizen: Why, so hath this, both by the father and mother.

BUCKINGHAM: I go: and towards three or four o'clock Look for the news that the Guildhall affords.

STANLEY: The lords at Pomfret, when they rode from London, Were jocund, and supposed their state was sure, And they indeed had no cause to mistrust; But yet, you see how soon the day o'ercast. This sudden stag of rancour I misdoubt: Pray God, I say, I prove a needless coward! What, shall we toward the Tower? the day is spent.

First Murderer: How dost thou feel thyself now?

AUFIDIUS: Whence comest thou? what wouldst thou? thy name? Why speak'st not? speak, man: what's thy name?

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Give me no help in lamentation; I am not barren to bring forth complaints All springs reduce their currents to mine eyes, That I, being govern'd by the watery moon, May send forth plenteous tears to drown the world! Oh for my husband, for my dear lord Edward!

QUEEN MARGARET: Richard!

MENENIUS: This is strange now: do you two know how you are censured here in the city, I mean of us o' the right-hand file? do you?

DUCHESS OF YORK: What is thy news then?

BUCKINGHAM: The mayor is here at hand: intend some fear; Be not you spoke with, but by mighty suit: And look you get a prayer-book in your hand, And stand betwixt two churchmen, good my lord; For on that ground I'll build a holy descant: And be not easily won to our request: Play the maid's part, still answer nay, and take it.

GLOUCESTER: No doubt, no doubt; O, 'tis a parlous boy; Bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable He is all the mother's, from the top to toe.

First Citizen: He shall well know The noble tribunes are the people's mouths, And we their hands.

CORIOLANUS: Bid them wash their faces And keep their teeth clean. So, here comes a brace. You know the cause, air, of my standing here.

Second Citizen: Not one amongst us, save yourself, but says He used us scornfully: he should have show'd us His marks of merit, wounds received for's country.

BUCKINGHAM: And, in good time, here comes the noble duke. Visit our archive for more classic works.

COMINIUS: Nay, come away. Visit our archive for more classic works.

GLOUCESTER: Say, then, my peace is made.

BRUTUS: Fame, at the which he aims, In whom already he's well graced, can not Better be held nor more attain'd than by A place below the first: for what miscarries Shall be the general's fault, though he perform To the utmost of a man, and giddy censure Will then cry out of Marcius 'O if he Had borne the business!'

GLOUCESTER: The curse my noble father laid on thee, When thou didst crown his warlike brows with paper And with thy scorns drew'st rivers from his eyes, And then, to dry them, gavest the duke a clout Steep'd in the faultless blood of pretty Rutland-- His curses, then from bitterness of soul Denounced against thee, are all fall'n upon thee; And God, not we, hath plagued thy bloody deed.

QUEEN MARGARET: Hover about her; say, that right for right Hath dimm'd your infant morn to aged night.

Fourth Citizen: You have received many wounds for your country.

MENENIUS: O, he's a limb that has but a disease; Mortal, to cut it off; to cure it, easy. What has he done to Rome that's worthy death? Killing our enemies, the blood he hath lost-- Which, I dare vouch, is more than that he hath, By many an ounce--he dropp'd it for his country; And what is left, to lose it by his country, Were to us all, that do't and suffer it, A brand to the end o' the world.

MARCIUS: Nay, let them follow: The Volsces have much corn; take these rats thither To gnaw their garners. Worshipful mutiners, Your valour puts well forth: pray, follow.

VIRGILIA: Ay, and mine, That brought you forth this boy, to keep your name Living to time.

VIRGILIA: Yes, certain, there's a letter for you; I saw't.

COMINIUS: Yet one time he did call me by my name: I urged our old acquaintance, and the drops That we have bled together. Coriolanus He would not answer to: forbad all names; He was a kind of nothing, titleless, Till he had forged himself a name o' the fire Of burning Rome.

First Senator: Call Coriolanus.

BRAKENBURY: With this, my lord, myself have nought to do.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: No, to their lives bad friends were contrary.

First Senator: So, your opinion is, Aufidius, That they of Rome are entered in our counsels And know how we proceed.

VOLUMNIA: Nay,'tis true.

CORIOLANUS: Shall I be charged no further than this present? Must all determine here?

BUCKINGHAM: Well, let them rest. Come hither, Catesby. Thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend As closely to conceal what we impart: Thou know'st our reasons urged upon the way; What think'st thou? is it not an easy matter To make William Lord Hastings of our mind, For the instalment of this noble duke In the seat royal of this famous isle?

BRUTUS: In that there's comfort.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Pitchers have ears.

BUCKINGHAM: What says your highness to my just demand?

MARCIUS: May these same instruments, which you profane, Never sound more! when drums and trumpets shall I' the field prove flatterers, let courts and cities be Made all of false-faced soothing! When steel grows soft as the parasite's silk, Let him be made a coverture for the wars! No more, I say! For that I have not wash'd My nose that bled, or foil'd some debile wretch.-- Which, without note, here's many else have done,-- You shout me forth In acclamations hyperbolical; As if I loved my little should be dieted In praises sauced with lies. Visit our archive for more classic works.

MENENIUS: Come, enough.

Second Servingman: Away! get you away.

GLOUCESTER: Good counsel, marry: learn it, learn it, marquess.

Third Servingman: What are you?

GLOUCESTER: What news abroad?

MENENIUS: Noble lady! Come, go with us; speak fair: you may salve so, Not what is dangerous present, but the loss Of what is past.

CLARENCE: By heaven, I think there's no man is secure But the queen's kindred and night-walking heralds That trudge betwixt the king and Mistress Shore. Heard ye not what an humble suppliant Lord hastings was to her for his delivery?

SICINIUS: He cannot temperately transport his honours From where he should begin and end, but will Lose those he hath won.

VOLUMNIA: If that I could for weeping, you should hear,-- Nay, and you shall hear some. Will you be gone?

AUFIDIUS: Say no more: Here come the lords.

Second Citizen: You are never without your tricks: you may, you may.

First Servingman: But, more of thy news?

GLOUCESTER: Margaret.

CORIOLANUS: You are like to do such business.

VOLUMNIA: My first son. Whither wilt thou go? Take good Cominius With thee awhile: determine on some course, More than a wild exposture to each chance That starts i' the way before thee.

All: Resolved. resolved.

GLOUCESTER: I hope the king made peace with all of us And the compact is firm and true in me.

MENENIUS: Now it's twenty-seven: every gash was an enemy's grave. Hark! the trumpets.

BUCKINGHAM: Have done! for shame, if not for charity.

SICINIUS: We will meet them, And help the joy.

First Citizen: Your belly's answer? What! The kingly-crowned head, the vigilant eye, The counsellor heart, the arm our soldier, Our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter. With other muniments and petty helps In this our fabric, if that they--

All Conspirators: Kill, kill, kill, kill, kill him!

CORIOLANUS: Aufidius, and you Volsces, mark; for we'll Hear nought from Rome in private. Your request?

KING RICHARD III: I, even I: what think you of it, madam?

VOLUMNIA: Why, I pray you?

Second Citizen: So did we all. But, come, let's home.

HASTINGS: I go, my lord.

CORIOLANUS: Why, this was known before.

AUFIDIUS: And keep your honours safe!

A Patrician: You do the nobler.

QUEEN MARGARET: To serve me well, you all should do me duty, Teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects: O, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty!

QUEEN ELIZABETH: How fares the prince?

First Citizen: It was an answer: how apply you this?

RIVERS: And I, as I love Hastings with my heart!

BRAKENBURY: No marvel, my lord, though it affrighted you; I promise, I am afraid to hear you tell it.

GLOUCESTER: But he, poor soul, by your first order died, And that a winged Mercury did bear: Some tardy cripple bore the countermand, That came too lag to see him buried. God grant that some, less noble and less loyal, Nearer in bloody thoughts, but not in blood, Deserve not worse than wretched Clarence did, And yet go current from suspicion!

All: To the pot, I warrant him.

Children: Were never orphans had so dear a loss!

Second Murderer: I would he knew that I had saved his brother! Take thou the fee, and tell him what I say; For I repent me that the duke is slain.

CLARENCE: My brother's love, the devil, and my rage. Visit our archive for more classic works.

COMINIUS: He'll never hear him.

COMINIUS: If I should tell thee o'er this thy day's work, Thou'ldst not believe thy deeds: but I'll report it Where senators shall mingle tears with smiles, Where great patricians shall attend and shrug, I' the end admire, where ladies shall be frighted, And, gladly quaked, hear more; where the dull tribunes, That, with the fusty plebeians, hate thine honours, Shall say against their hearts 'We thank the gods Our Rome hath such a soldier.' Yet camest thou to a morsel of this feast, Having fully dined before. Visit our archive for more classic works.

SICINIUS: When we were chosen tribunes for the people,--

First Murderer: So when he opens his purse to give us our reward, thy conscience flies out.

DORSET: A boon, my sovereign, for my service done!

COMINIUS: Well, well, no more.

LORD STANLEY: Come, madam, come; I in all haste was sent.

DUCHESS OF YORK: Ah, so much interest have I in thy sorrow As I had title in thy noble husband! I have bewept a worthy husband's death, And lived by looking on his images: But now two mirrors of his princely semblance Are crack'd in pieces by malignant death, And I for comfort have but one false glass, Which grieves me when I see my shame in him. Thou art a widow; yet thou art a mother, And hast the comfort of thy children left thee: But death hath snatch'd my husband from mine arms, And pluck'd two crutches from my feeble limbs, Edward and Clarence. O, what cause have I, Thine being but a moiety of my grief, To overgo thy plaints and drown thy cries!

GLOUCESTER: Why, what should you fear?

Roman: The main blaze of it is past, but a small thing would make it flame again: for the nobles receive so to heart the banishment of that worthy Coriolanus, that they are in a ripe aptness to take all power from the people and to pluck from them their tribunes for ever. This lies glowing, I can tell you, and is almost mature for the violent breaking out.

DUCHESS OF YORK: I'll go along with you.

Second Servingman: Whence are you, sir? Has the porter his eyes in his head; that he gives entrance to such companions? Pray, get you out.

BRUTUS: The people are incensed against him.

Roman: There hath been in Rome strange insurrections; the people against the senators, patricians, and nobles.

VOLUMNIA: Nay, go not from us thus. If it were so that our request did tend To save the Romans, thereby to destroy The Volsces whom you serve, you might condemn us, As poisonous of your honour: no; our suit Is that you reconcile them: while the Volsces May say 'This mercy we have show'd;' the Romans, 'This we received;' and each in either side Give the all-hail to thee and cry 'Be blest For making up this peace!' Thou know'st, great son, The end of war's uncertain, but this certain, That, if thou conquer Rome, the benefit Which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name, Whose repetition will be dogg'd with curses; Whose chronicle thus writ: 'The man was noble, But with his last attempt he wiped it out; Destroy'd his country, and his name remains To the ensuing age abhorr'd.' Speak to me, son: Thou hast affected the fine strains of honour, To imitate the graces of the gods; To tear with thunder the wide cheeks o' the air, And yet to charge thy sulphur with a bolt That should but rive an oak. Why dost not speak? Think'st thou it honourable for a noble man Still to remember wrongs? Daughter, speak you: He cares not for your weeping. Speak thou, boy: Perhaps thy childishness will move him more Than can our reasons. There's no man in the world More bound to 's mother; yet here he lets me prate Like one i' the stocks. Thou hast never in thy life Show'd thy dear mother any courtesy, When she, poor hen, fond of no second brood, Has cluck'd thee to the wars and safely home, Loaden with honour. Say my request's unjust, And spurn me back: but if it be not so, Thou art not honest; and the gods will plague thee, That thou restrain'st from me the duty which To a mother's part belongs. He turns away: Down, ladies; let us shame him with our knees. To his surname Coriolanus 'longs more pride Than pity to our prayers. Down: an end; This is the last: so we will home to Rome, And die among our neighbours. Nay, behold 's: This boy, that cannot tell what he would have But kneels and holds up bands for fellowship, Does reason our petition with more strength Than thou hast to deny 't. Come, let us go: This fellow had a Volscian to his mother; His wife is in Corioli and his child Like him by chance. Yet give us our dispatch: I am hush'd until our city be a-fire, And then I'll speak a little.

Third Servingman: Where's that?

VIRGILIA: Heavens bless my lord from fell Aufidius!

AUFIDIUS: All places yield to him ere he sits down; And the nobility of Rome are his: The senators and patricians love him too: The tribunes are no soldiers; and their people Will be as rash in the repeal, as hasty To expel him thence. I think he'll be to Rome As is the osprey to the fish, who takes it By sovereignty of nature. First he was A noble servant to them; but he could not Carry his honours even: whether 'twas pride, Which out of daily fortune ever taints The happy man; whether defect of judgment, To fail in the disposing of those chances Which he was lord of; or whether nature, Not to be other than one thing, not moving From the casque to the cushion, but commanding peace Even with the same austerity and garb As he controll'd the war; but one of these-- As he hath spices of them all, not all, For I dare so far free him--made him fear'd, So hated, and so banish'd: but he has a merit, To choke it in the utterance. So our virtues Lie in the interpretation of the time: And power, unto itself most commendable, Hath not a tomb so evident as a chair To extol what it hath done. One fire drives out one fire; one nail, one nail; Rights by rights falter, strengths by strengths do fail. Come, let's away. When, Caius, Rome is thine, Thou art poor'st of all; then shortly art thou mine.

MENENIUS: What is granted them?

GLOUCESTER: This is the fruit of rashness! Mark'd you not How that the guilty kindred of the queen Look'd pale when they did hear of Clarence' death? O, they did urge it still unto the king! God will revenge it. But come, let us in, To comfort Edward with our company.

Both Tribunes: Say not we brought it.

BRUTUS: Ay, spare us not. Say we read lectures to you. How youngly he began to serve his country, How long continued, and what stock he springs of, The noble house o' the Marcians, from whence came That Ancus Marcius, Numa's daughter's son, Who, after great Hostilius, here was king; Of the same house Publius and Quintus were, That our beat water brought by conduits hither; And Twice being Was his great ancestor.

BUCKINGHAM: Go, go, up to the leads; the lord mayor knocks. Welcome my lord; I dance attendance here; I think the duke will not be spoke withal. Here comes his servant: how now, Catesby, What says he?

SICINIUS: Tell not me: I know this cannot be.

VOLUMNIA: Nay, my good soldier, up; My gentle Marcius, worthy Caius, and By deed-achieving honour newly named,-- What is it?--Coriolanus must I call thee?-- But O, thy wife!

HASTINGS: O bloody Richard! miserable England! I prophesy the fearful'st time to thee That ever wretched age hath look'd upon. Come, lead me to the block; bear him my head. They smile at me that shortly shall be dead.

MENENIUS: One i' the neck, and two i' the thigh,--there's nine that I know.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Oh, who shall hinder me to wail and weep, To chide my fortune, and torment myself? I'll join with black despair against my soul, And to myself become an enemy.

GLOUCESTER: Plantagenet. Visit our archive for more classic works.

First Senator: Behold our patroness, the life of Rome! Call all your tribes together, praise the gods, And make triumphant fires; strew flowers before them: Unshout the noise that banish'd Marcius, Repeal him with the welcome of his mother; Cry 'Welcome, ladies, welcome!'

RIVERS: Then cursed she Hastings, then cursed she Buckingham, Then cursed she Richard. O, remember, God To hear her prayers for them, as now for us And for my sister and her princely sons, Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood, Which, as thou know'st, unjustly must be spilt.

BISHOP OF ELY: My lord?

BUCKINGHAM: My lord, your promise for the earldom,--

VOLUMNIA: Indeed, you shall not. Methinks I hear hither your husband's drum, See him pluck Aufidius down by the hair, As children from a bear, the Volsces shunning him: Methinks I see him stamp thus, and call thus: 'Come on, you cowards! you were got in fear, Though you were born in Rome:' his bloody brow With his mail'd hand then wiping, forth he goes, Like to a harvest-man that's task'd to mow Or all or lose his hire.

VOLUMNIA: Titus Lartius writes, they fought together, but Aufidius got off.

QUEEN MARGARET: So, now prosperity begins to mellow And drop into the rotten mouth of death. Here in these confines slily have I lurk'd, To watch the waning of mine adversaries. A dire induction am I witness to, And will to France, hoping the consequence Will prove as bitter, black, and tragical. Withdraw thee, wretched Margaret: who comes here?

SICINIUS: Have with you.

First Servingman: Directitude! what's that?

VOLUMNIA: He'll beat Aufidius 'head below his knee And tread upon his neck.

COMINIUS: Nay, come away.

YORK: I pray you, uncle, give me this dagger.

KING RICHARD III: Do then: but I'll not hear.

GLOUCESTER: The fitter for the King of heaven, that hath him.

BRUTUS: Well, well, we'll leave you.

BUCKINGHAM: We wait upon your grace.

KING EDWARD IV: Why, so: now have I done a good day's work: You peers, continue this united league: I every day expect an embassage From my Redeemer to redeem me hence; And now in peace my soul shall part to heaven, Since I have set my friends at peace on earth. Rivers and Hastings, take each other's hand; Dissemble not your hatred, swear your love.

MENENIUS: Nay, I hear nothing: his mother and his wife Hear nothing from him. Visit our archive for more classic works.

SICINIUS: We hear not of him, neither need we fear him; His remedies are tame i' the present peace And quietness of the people, which before Were in wild hurry. Here do we make his friends Blush that the world goes well, who rather had, Though they themselves did suffer by't, behold Dissentious numbers pestering streets than see Our tradesmen with in their shops and going About their functions friendly.

BRUTUS: Cominius, no.

BUCKINGHAM: Whenever Buckingham doth turn his hate On you or yours, but with all duteous love Doth cherish you and yours, God punish me With hate in those where I expect most love! When I have most need to employ a friend, And most assured that he is a friend Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile, Be he unto me! this do I beg of God, When I am cold in zeal to yours.

MENENIUS: You worthy tribunes,--

COMINIUS: You have holp to ravish your own daughters and To melt the city leads upon your pates, To see your wives dishonour'd to your noses,--

CORIOLANUS: It is a purposed thing, and grows by plot, To curb the will of the nobility: Suffer't, and live with such as cannot rule Nor ever will be ruled.

VOLUMNIA: Bastards and all. Good man, the wounds that he does bear for Rome!

BUCKINGHAM: Now, my lord, what shall we do, if we perceive Lord Hastings will not yield to our complots?

Second Murderer: A man, as you are.

MENENIUS: Having determined of the Volsces and To send for Titus Lartius, it remains, As the main point of this our after-meeting, To gratify his noble service that Hath thus stood for his country: therefore, please you, Most reverend and grave elders, to desire The present consul, and last general In our well-found successes, to report A little of that worthy work perform'd By Caius Marcius Coriolanus, whom We met here both to thank and to remember With honours like himself.

COMINIUS: Know, I pray you,-- Visit our archive for more classic works.

VAUGHAN: You live that shall cry woe for this after.

SICINIUS: On the sudden, I warrant him consul.

BUCKINGHAM: Two props of virtue for a Christian prince, To stay him from the fall of vanity: And, see, a book of prayer in his hand, True ornaments to know a holy man. Famous Plantagenet, most gracious prince, Lend favourable ears to our request; And pardon us the interruption Of thy devotion and right Christian zeal.

CORIOLANUS: Say, then: 'tis true, I ought so.

Second Murderer: Why, so he doth, now he delivers thee From this world's thraldom to the joys of heaven.

CORIOLANUS: How? what?

Second Lord: His own impatience Takes from Aufidius a great part of blame. Let's make the best of it.

First Murderer: Relent! 'tis cowardly and womanish.

AUFIDIUS: We hate alike: Not Afric owns a serpent I abhor More than thy fame and envy. Fix thy foot.

VAUGHAN: You live that shall cry woe for this after. Visit our archive for more classic works.

BUCKINGHAM: He did, my gracious lord, begin that place; Which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified.

BRUTUS: I talk of that, that know it.

GLOUCESTER: O, my fair cousin, I must not say so.

GLOUCESTER: How fares our cousin, noble Lord of York?

BRAKENBURY: Right well, dear madam. By your patience, I may not suffer you to visit them; The king hath straitly charged the contrary.

First Citizen: The former agents, if they did complain, What could the belly answer?

DUCHESS OF YORK: Alas for both, both mine, Edward and Clarence!

SICINIUS: Yes, mercy, if you report him truly.

KING RICHARD III: Come to me, Tyrrel, soon at after supper, And thou shalt tell the process of their death. Meantime, but think how I may do thee good, And be inheritor of thy desire. Farewell till soon. The son of Clarence have I pent up close; His daughter meanly have I match'd in marriage; The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham's bosom, And Anne my wife hath bid the world good night. Now, for I know the Breton Richmond aims At young Elizabeth, my brother's daughter, And, by that knot, looks proudly o'er the crown, To her I go, a jolly thriving wooer.

CORIOLANUS: Hail, lords! I am return'd your soldier, No more infected with my country's love Than when I parted hence, but still subsisting Under your great command. You are to know That prosperously I have attempted and With bloody passage led your wars even to The gates of Rome. Our spoils we have brought home Do more than counterpoise a full third part The charges of the action. We have made peace With no less honour to the Antiates Than shame to the Romans: and we here deliver, Subscribed by the consuls and patricians, Together with the seal o' the senate, what We have compounded on.

BRUTUS: What then, sir?

DUCHESS OF YORK: Blind sight, dead life, poor mortal living ghost, Woe's scene, world's shame, grave's due by life usurp'd, Brief abstract and record of tedious days, Rest thy unrest on England's lawful earth, Unlawfully made drunk with innocents' blood! Visit our archive for more classic works.

BISHOP OF ELY: Where is my lord protector? I have sent for these strawberries.

Roman: The day serves well for them now. I have heard it said, the fittest time to corrupt a man's wife is when she's fallen out with her husband. Your noble Tullus Aufidius will appear well in these wars, his great opposer, Coriolanus, being now in no request of his country.

BUCKINGHAM: I did; with his contract with Lady Lucy, And his contract by deputy in France; The insatiate greediness of his desires, And his enforcement of the city wives; His tyranny for trifles; his own bastardy, As being got, your father then in France, His resemblance, being not like the duke; Withal I did infer your lineaments, Being the right idea of your father, Both in your form and nobleness of mind; Laid open all your victories in Scotland, Your dicipline in war, wisdom in peace, Your bounty, virtue, fair humility: Indeed, left nothing fitting for the purpose Untouch'd, or slightly handled, in discourse And when mine oratory grew to an end I bid them that did love their country's good Cry 'God save Richard, England's royal king!'

MENENIUS: A good demand.

GLOUCESTER: My lord, the mayor of London comes to greet you.

BUCKINGHAM: God and our innocency defend and guard us!

CORIOLANUS: True, so I am.

CLARENCE: O Brakenbury, I have done those things, Which now bear evidence against my soul, For Edward's sake; and see how he requites me! O God! if my deep prayers cannot appease thee, But thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds, Yet execute thy wrath in me alone, O, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children! I pray thee, gentle keeper, stay by me; My soul is heavy, and I fain would sleep.

Second Murderer: What shall we do?

Citizens: Come, come; let's see him out at gates; come. The gods preserve our noble tribunes! Come.

VOLUMNIA: True! pow, wow.

LADY ANNE: Why, that was he.

LARTIUS: O noble fellow! Who sensibly outdares his senseless sword, And, when it bows, stands up. Thou art left, Marcius: A carbuncle entire, as big as thou art, Were not so rich a jewel. Thou wast a soldier Even to Cato's wish, not fierce and terrible Only in strokes; but, with thy grim looks and The thunder-like percussion of thy sounds, Thou madst thine enemies shake, as if the world Were feverous and did tremble.

DUCHESS OF YORK: Peace, children, peace! the king doth love you well: Incapable and shallow innocents, You cannot guess who caused your father's death.

Both: Well, well, sir, well.

RIVERS: Is it concluded that he shall be protector?

PRINCE EDWARD: I fear no uncles dead.

CORIOLANUS: Though there the people had more absolute power, I say, they nourish'd disobedience, fed The ruin of the state.

MENENIUS: I would they were in Tiber! What the vengeance! Could he not speak 'em fair?

SICINIUS: Why, what of that? Visit our archive for more classic works.

MARCIUS: Let him alone; He did inform the truth: but for our gentlemen, The common file--a plague! tribunes for them!-- The mouse ne'er shunn'd the cat as they did budge From rascals worse than they.

BRUTUS: Let's to the Capitol; And carry with us ears and eyes for the time, But hearts for the event.

MENENIUS: Consider further, That when he speaks not like a citizen, You find him like a soldier: do not take His rougher accents for malicious sounds, But, as I say, such as become a soldier, Rather than envy you.

CATESBY: Madam, his majesty doth call for you, And for your grace; and you, my noble lords.

Second Servingman: Faith, look you, one cannot tell how to say that: for the defence of a town, our general is excellent.

PRINCE EDWARD: God keep me from false friends! but they were none.

GLOUCESTER: Sirs, take up the corse.

MENENIUS: Nay, temperately; your promise.

Second Servingman: Who, my master?

CORIOLANUS: Now thou'rt troublesome.

MENENIUS: His nature is too noble for the world: He would not flatter Neptune for his trident, Or Jove for's power to thunder. His heart's his mouth: What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent; And, being angry, does forget that ever He heard the name of death. Here's goodly work!

LADY ANNE: With all my heart; and much it joys me too, To see you are become so penitent. Tressel and Berkeley, go along with me.

VIRGILIA: What then! He'ld make an end of thy posterity.

SICINIUS: It shall be to him then as our good wills, A sure destruction.

GLOUCESTER: They do me wrong, and I will not endure it: Who are they that complain unto the king, That I, forsooth, am stern, and love them not? By holy Paul, they love his grace but lightly That fill his ears with such dissentious rumours. Because I cannot flatter and speak fair, Smile in men's faces, smooth, deceive and cog, Duck with French nods and apish courtesy, I must be held a rancorous enemy. Cannot a plain man live and think no harm, But thus his simple truth must be abused By silken, sly, insinuating Jacks?

Messenger: Yes, worthy sir, The slave's report is seconded; and more, More fearful, is deliver'd.

COMINIUS: I shall lack voice: the deeds of Coriolanus Should not be utter'd feebly. It is held That valour is the chiefest virtue, and Most dignifies the haver: if it be, The man I speak of cannot in the world Be singly counterpoised. At sixteen years, When Tarquin made a head for Rome, he fought Beyond the mark of others: our then dictator, Whom with all praise I point at, saw him fight, When with his Amazonian chin he drove The bristled lips before him: be bestrid An o'er-press'd Roman and i' the consul's view Slew three opposers: Tarquin's self he met, And struck him on his knee: in that day's feats, When he might act the woman in the scene, He proved best man i' the field, and for his meed Was brow-bound with the oak. His pupil age Man-enter'd thus, he waxed like a sea, And in the brunt of seventeen battles since He lurch'd all swords of the garland. For this last, Before and in Corioli, let me say, I cannot speak him home: he stopp'd the fliers; And by his rare example made the coward Turn terror into sport: as weeds before A vessel under sail, so men obey'd And fell below his stem: his sword, death's stamp, Where it did mark, it took; from face to foot He was a thing of blood, whose every motion Was timed with dying cries: alone he enter'd The mortal gate of the city, which he painted With shunless destiny; aidless came off, And with a sudden reinforcement struck Corioli like a planet: now all's his: When, by and by, the din of war gan pierce His ready sense; then straight his doubled spirit Re-quicken'd what in flesh was fatigate, And to the battle came he; where he did Run reeking o'er the lives of men, as if 'Twere a perpetual spoil: and till we call'd Both field and city ours, he never stood To ease his breast with panting.

MARCIUS: See here these movers that do prize their hours At a crack'd drachm! Cushions, leaden spoons, Irons of a doit, doublets that hangmen would Bury with those that wore them, these base slaves, Ere yet the fight be done, pack up: down with them! And hark, what noise the general makes! To him! There is the man of my soul's hate, Aufidius, Piercing our Romans: then, valiant Titus, take Convenient numbers to make good the city; Whilst I, with those that have the spirit, will haste To help Cominius.

CORIOLANUS: I know no further: Let them pronounce the steep Tarpeian death, Vagabond exile, raying, pent to linger But with a grain a day, I would not buy Their mercy at the price of one fair word; Nor cheque my courage for what they can give, To have't with saying 'Good morrow.'

COMINIUS: You have brought A trembling upon Rome, such as was never So incapable of help.

VALERIA: Fie, you confine yourself most unreasonably: come, you must go visit the good lady that lies in.

CORIOLANUS: Menenius ever, ever.

Young MARCIUS: A' shall not tread on me; I'll run away till I am bigger, but then I'll fight.

MENENIUS: From Rome.

HASTINGS: I'll wait upon your lordship.

DUCHESS OF YORK: Ay, boy.

All: Content, content.

BRAKENBURY: Why looks your grace so heavily today?

MENENIUS: 'Tis true: If he were putting to my house the brand That should consume it, I have not the face To say 'Beseech you, cease.' You have made fair hands, You and your crafts! you have crafted fair!

KING RICHARD III: Even he that makes her queen who should be else?

GLOUCESTER: He that bereft thee, lady, of thy husband, Did it to help thee to a better husband.

MENENIUS: There is differency between a grub and a butterfly; yet your butterfly was a grub. This Marcius is grown from man to dragon: he has wings; he's more than a creeping thing.

GLOUCESTER: Vouchsafe to wear this ring.

HASTINGS: If they have done this thing, my gracious lord--

KING RICHARD III: Because that, like a Jack, thou keep'st the stroke Betwixt thy begging and my meditation. I am not in the giving vein to-day.

DUCHESS OF YORK: Who meets us here? my niece Plantagenet Led in the hand of her kind aunt of Gloucester? Now, for my life, she's wandering to the Tower, On pure heart's love to greet the tender princes. Daughter, well met.

MARCIUS: They fear us not, but issue forth their city. Now put your shields before your hearts, and fight With hearts more proof than shields. Advance, brave Titus: They do disdain us much beyond our thoughts, Which makes me sweat with wrath. Come on, my fellows: He that retires I'll take him for a Volsce, And he shall feel mine edge.

MENENIUS: Sir, sir,--

VOLUMNIA: He had rather see the swords, and hear a drum, than look upon his school-master.

BRUTUS: He has no equal.

GLOUCESTER: In saying so, you shall but say the truth.

AUFIDIUS: I understand thee well; and be thou sure, when he shall come to his account, he knows not What I can urge against him. Although it seems, And so he thinks, and is no less apparent To the vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly. And shows good husbandry for the Volscian state, Fights dragon-like, and does achieve as soon As draw his sword; yet he hath left undone That which shall break his neck or hazard mine, Whene'er we come to our account.

Boy: Think you my uncle did dissemble, grandam?

GREY: The heavens have bless'd you with a goodly son, To be your comforter when he is gone.

SICINIUS: Hear me, people; peace! Visit our archive for more classic works.

GLOUCESTER: How now, my lord, what say the citizens?

VIRGILIA: I thank your ladyship; well, good madam.

Third Citizen: Certainly He flouted us downright. Visit our archive for more classic works.

VOLUMNIA: You might have been enough the man you are, With striving less to be so; lesser had been The thwartings of your dispositions, if You had not show'd them how ye were disposed Ere they lack'd power to cross you.

QUEEN MARGARET: I call thee not.

DUCHESS OF YORK: Who hath committed them?

SICINIUS: What more fearful?

Herald: Give way there, and go on!

SICINIUS: Have you a catalogue Of all the voices that we have procured Set down by the poll?

GLOUCESTER: Wert thou not banished on pain of death?

KING RICHARD III: Rumour it abroad That Anne, my wife, is sick and like to die: I will take order for her keeping close. Inquire me out some mean-born gentleman, Whom I will marry straight to Clarence' daughter: The boy is foolish, and I fear not him. Look, how thou dream'st! I say again, give out That Anne my wife is sick and like to die: About it; for it stands me much upon, To stop all hopes whose growth may damage me. I must be married to my brother's daughter, Or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass. Murder her brothers, and then marry her! Uncertain way of gain! But I am in So far in blood that sin will pluck on sin: Tear-falling pity dwells not in this eye. Is thy name Tyrrel?

BUCKINGHAM: You have, my lord: would it might please your grace, At our entreaties, to amend that fault!

GLOUCESTER: I do suspect I have done some offence That seems disgracious in the city's eyes, And that you come to reprehend my ignorance.

KING RICHARD III: Madam, I have a touch of your condition, Which cannot brook the accent of reproof.

GLOUCESTER: Fairer than tongue can name thee, let me have Some patient leisure to excuse myself.

KING RICHARD III: Catesby!

CORIOLANUS: Like a dull actor now, I have forgot my part, and I am out, Even to a full disgrace. Best of my flesh, Forgive my tyranny; but do not say For that 'Forgive our Romans.' O, a kiss Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge! Now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss I carried from thee, dear; and my true lip Hath virgin'd it e'er since. You gods! I prate, And the most noble mother of the world Leave unsaluted: sink, my knee, i' the earth; Of thy deep duty more impression show Than that of common sons.

KING RICHARD III: You speak too bitterly.

MENENIUS: It then remains That you do speak to the people.

KING RICHARD III: Good news or bad, that thou comest in so bluntly?

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Oh, he is young and his minority Is put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester, A man that loves not me, nor none of you.

First Senator: He cannot but with measure fit the honours Which we devise him.

Third Citizen: But this is something odd.

CORIOLANUS: Thou wretch, despite o'erwhelm thee! What should the people do with these bald tribunes? On whom depending, their obedience fails To the greater bench: in a rebellion, When what's not meet, but what must be, was law, Then were they chosen: in a better hour, Let what is meet be said it must be meet, And throw their power i' the dust.

COMINIUS: Look, sir, your mother!

BRAKENBURY: I cry you mercy: I mean the lord protector.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: I never did her any, to my knowledge.

CORIOLANUS: Nay! prithee, woman,--