CATESBY: The princes both make high account of you; For they account his head upon the bridge.

KING EDWARD IV: Now, princely Buckingham, seal thou this league With thy embracements to my wife's allies, And make me happy in your unity.

BRAKENBURY: Had you such leisure in the time of death To gaze upon the secrets of the deep?

BUCKINGHAM: Then I salute you with this kingly title: Long live Richard, England's royal king! Visit our archive for more classic works.

GLOUCESTER: What! threat you me with telling of the king? Tell him, and spare not: look, what I have said I will avouch in presence of the king: I dare adventure to be sent to the Tower. 'Tis time to speak; my pains are quite forgot.

MENENIUS: Take my cap, Jupiter, and I thank thee. Hoo! Marcius coming home!

COMINIUS: Should they not, Well might they fester 'gainst ingratitude, And tent themselves with death. Of all the horses, Whereof we have ta'en good and good store, of all The treasure in this field achieved and city, We render you the tenth, to be ta'en forth, Before the common distribution, at Your only choice.

Second Servingman: Why, then we shall have a stirring world again. This peace is nothing, but to rust iron, increase tailors, and breed ballad-makers.

VIRGILIA: No, at a word, madam; indeed, I must not. I wish you much mirth.

CATESBY: Bad news, my lord: Ely is fled to Richmond; And Buckingham, back'd with the hardy Welshmen, Is in the field, and still his power increaseth.

VOLUMNIA: Because that now it lies you on to speak To the people; not by your own instruction, Nor by the matter which your heart prompts you, But with such words that are but rooted in Your tongue, though but bastards and syllables Of no allowance to your bosom's truth. Now, this no more dishonours you at all Than to take in a town with gentle words, Which else would put you to your fortune and The hazard of much blood. I would dissemble with my nature where My fortunes and my friends at stake required I should do so in honour: I am in this, Your wife, your son, these senators, the nobles; And you will rather show our general louts How you can frown than spend a fawn upon 'em, For the inheritance of their loves and safeguard Of what that want might ruin.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Though far more cause, yet much less spirit to curse Abides in me; I say amen to all.

First Murderer: What we will do, we do upon command.

CORIOLANUS: What must I say? 'I Pray, sir'--Plague upon't! I cannot bring My tongue to such a pace:--'Look, sir, my wounds! I got them in my country's service, when Some certain of your brethren roar'd and ran From the noise of our own drums.'

MENENIUS: If it be possible for you to displace it with your little finger, there is some hope the ladies of Rome, especially his mother, may prevail with him. But I say there is no hope in't: our throats are sentenced and stay upon execution.

First Senator: To unbuild the city and to lay all flat.

LOVEL: Come, come, dispatch; 'tis bootless to exclaim.

GREY: In that you brook it in, it makes him worse: Therefore, for God's sake, entertain good comfort, And cheer his grace with quick and merry words.

BRUTUS: There's no more to be said, but he is banish'd, As enemy to the people and his country: It shall be so.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: For what offence?

MENENIUS: I will make my very house reel tonight: a letter for me!

BRUTUS: Did you perceive He did solicit you in free contempt When he did need your loves, and do you think That his contempt shall not be bruising to you, When he hath power to crush? Why, had your bodies No heart among you? or had you tongues to cry Against the rectorship of judgment?

BUCKINGHAM: Well, well, he was the covert'st shelter'd traitor That ever lived. Would you imagine, or almost believe, Were't not that, by great preservation, We live to tell it you, the subtle traitor This day had plotted, in the council-house To murder me and my good Lord of Gloucester?

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Would all were well! but that will never be I fear our happiness is at the highest.

GLOUCESTER: Where it seems best unto your royal self. If I may counsel you, some day or two Your highness shall repose you at the Tower: Then where you please, and shall be thought most fit For your best health and recreation.

DUCHESS OF YORK: O, let me speak!

MARCIUS: As with a man busied about decrees: Condemning some to death, and some to exile; Ransoming him, or pitying, threatening the other; Holding Corioli in the name of Rome, Even like a fawning greyhound in the leash, To let him slip at will.

Third Citizen: He's not confirm'd; we may deny him yet.

VOLUMNIA: Then his good report should have been my son; I therein would have found issue. Hear me profess sincerely: had I a dozen sons, each in my love alike and none less dear than thine and my good Marcius, I had rather had eleven die nobly for their country than one voluptuously surfeit out of action.

CORIOLANUS: No, sir: yet oft, When blows have made me stay, I fled from words. You soothed not, therefore hurt not: but your people, I love them as they weigh.

COMINIUS: Where is that slave Which told me they had beat you to your trenches? Where is he? call him hither.

GLOUCESTER: Tush, that was in thy rage: Speak it again, and, even with the word, That hand, which, for thy love, did kill thy love, Shall, for thy love, kill a far truer love; To both their deaths thou shalt be accessary.

SICINIUS: Go, call the people: in whose name myself Attach thee as a traitorous innovator, A foe to the public weal: obey, I charge thee, And follow to thine answer.

LADY ANNE: I have already.

RIVERS: Madam, bethink you, like a careful mother, Of the young prince your son: send straight for him Let him be crown'd; in him your comfort lives: Drown desperate sorrow in dead Edward's grave, And plant your joys in living Edward's throne.

VOLUMNIA: Thou art my warrior; I holp to frame thee. Do you know this lady?

QUEEN MARGARET: A murderous villain, and so still thou art.

CLARENCE: Methought I had; and often did I strive To yield the ghost: but still the envious flood Kept in my soul, and would not let it forth To seek the empty, vast and wandering air; But smother'd it within my panting bulk, Which almost burst to belch it in the sea.

COMINIUS: I offer'd to awaken his regard For's private friends: his answer to me was, He could not stay to pick them in a pile Of noisome musty chaff: he said 'twas folly, For one poor grain or two, to leave unburnt, And still to nose the offence.

CORIOLANUS: This last old man, Whom with a crack'd heart I have sent to Rome, Loved me above the measure of a father; Nay, godded me, indeed. Their latest refuge Was to send him; for whose old love I have, Though I show'd sourly to him, once more offer'd The first conditions, which they did refuse And cannot now accept; to grace him only That thought he could do more, a very little I have yielded to: fresh embassies and suits, Nor from the state nor private friends, hereafter Will I lend ear to. Ha! what shout is this? Shall I be tempted to infringe my vow In the same time 'tis made? I will not. My wife comes foremost; then the honour'd mould Wherein this trunk was framed, and in her hand The grandchild to her blood. But, out, affection! All bond and privilege of nature, break! Let it be virtuous to be obstinate. What is that curt'sy worth? or those doves' eyes, Which can make gods forsworn? I melt, and am not Of stronger earth than others. My mother bows; As if Olympus to a molehill should In supplication nod: and my young boy Hath an aspect of intercession, which Great nature cries 'Deny not.' let the Volsces Plough Rome and harrow Italy: I'll never Be such a gosling to obey instinct, but stand, As if a man were author of himself And knew no other kin.

LADY ANNE: He is in heaven, where thou shalt never come.

Third Servingman: O slaves, I can tell you news,-- news, you rascals!

TITUS: No, Caius Marcius; I'll lean upon one crutch and fight with t'other, Ere stay behind this business.

BRUTUS: You speak o' the people, As if you were a god to punish, not A man of their infirmity.

MARCIUS: Say, has our general met the enemy?

QUEEN ELIZABETH: What, thou?

HASTINGS: Marry, that with no man here he is offended; For, were he, he had shown it in his looks.

QUEEN MARGARET: When holy Harry died, and my sweet son.

CORIOLANUS: How! no more! As for my country I have shed my blood, Not fearing outward force, so shall my lungs Coin words till their decay against those measles, Which we disdain should tatter us, yet sought The very way to catch them.

First Citizen: Should by the cormorant belly be restrain'd, Who is the sink o' the body,--

Citizens: You so remain.

LADY ANNE: I would I knew thy heart.

CORIOLANUS: Choler! Were I as patient as the midnight sleep, By Jove, 'twould be my mind!

AEdile: List to your tribunes. Audience: peace, I say!

MENENIUS: Masters of the people, Your multiplying spawn how can he flatter-- That's thousand to one good one--when you now see He had rather venture all his limbs for honour Than one on's ears to hear it? Proceed, Cominius.

First Citizen: He has our voices, sir.

KING RICHARD III: Be not so hasty to confound my meaning: I mean, that with my soul I love thy daughter, And mean to make her queen of England.

COMINIUS: O, ay, what else?

BRUTUS: Or let us stand to our authority, Or let us lose it. We do here pronounce, Upon the part o' the people, in whose power We were elected theirs, Marcius is worthy Of present death.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: To make an act of tragic violence: Edward, my lord, your son, our king, is dead. Why grow the branches now the root is wither'd? Why wither not the leaves the sap being gone? If you will live, lament; if die, be brief, That our swift-winged souls may catch the king's; Or, like obedient subjects, follow him To his new kingdom of perpetual rest.

MENENIUS: I know you can do very little alone; for your helps are many, or else your actions would grow wondrous single: your abilities are too infant-like for doing much alone. You talk of pride: O that you could turn your eyes toward the napes of your necks, and make but an interior survey of your good selves! O that you could!

Second Citizen: An 'twere to give again,--but 'tis no matter.

Second Servingman: Here, sir: I'ld have beaten him like a dog, but for disturbing the lords within.

HASTINGS: O monstrous, monstrous! and so falls it out With Rivers, Vaughan, Grey: and so 'twill do With some men else, who think themselves as safe As thou and I; who, as thou know'st, are dear To princely Richard and to Buckingham. Visit our archive for more classic works.

GLOUCESTER: I pray you all, tell me what they deserve That do conspire my death with devilish plots Of damned witchcraft, and that have prevail'd Upon my body with their hellish charms?

Third Servingman: Pray you, poor gentleman, take up some other station; here's no place for you; pray you, avoid: come.

BRUTUS: Manifest treason!

VIRGILIA: Indeed, madam?

SICINIUS: Go, masters, get you home; be not dismay'd: These are a side that would be glad to have This true which they so seem to fear. Go home, And show no sign of fear.

CORIOLANUS: The noble sister of Publicola, The moon of Rome, chaste as the icicle That's curdied by the frost from purest snow And hangs on Dian's temple: dear Valeria!

BRUTUS: Say, you ne'er had done't-- Harp on that still--but by our putting on; And presently, when you have drawn your number, Repair to the Capitol.

CATESBY: God keep your lordship in that gracious mind!

BRUTUS: It was his word: O, he would miss it rather Than carry it but by the suit of the gentry to him, And the desire of the nobles.

SICINIUS: Nor I. Visit our archive for more classic works.

VALERIA: Indeed, la, 'tis a noble child.

GLOUCESTER: At Crosby Place, there shall you find us both.

CORIOLANUS: Hence, rotten thing! or I shall shake thy bones Out of thy garments.

CLARENCE: You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so, And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it. Wherein, my friends, have I offended you?

CORIOLANUS: These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome.

CLARENCE: His majesty Tendering my person's safety, hath appointed This conduct to convey me to the Tower.

DORSET: The forfeit, sovereign, of my servant's life; Who slew to-day a righteous gentleman Lately attendant on the Duke of Norfolk.

BUCKINGHAM: Marry, my lord, lest, by a multitude, The new-heal'd wound of malice should break out, Which would be so much the more dangerous By how much the estate is green and yet ungovern'd: Where every horse bears his commanding rein, And may direct his course as please himself, As well the fear of harm, as harm apparent, In my opinion, ought to be prevented.

LADY ANNE: Some dungeon.

VALERIA: How do you both? you are manifest house-keepers. What are you sewing here? A fine spot, in good faith. How does your little son?

KING RICHARD III: Ely with Richmond troubles me more near Than Buckingham and his rash-levied army. Come, I have heard that fearful commenting Is leaden servitor to dull delay; Delay leads impotent and snail-paced beggary Then fiery expedition be my wing, Jove's Mercury, and herald for a king! Come, muster men: my counsel is my shield; We must be brief when traitors brave the field.

GLOUCESTER: Alas, why would you heap these cares on me? I am unfit for state and majesty; I do beseech you, take it not amiss; I cannot nor I will not yield to you.

SICINIUS: Hear me, people; peace!

Messenger: The nobles in great earnestness are going All to the senate-house: some news is come That turns their countenances. Visit our archive for more classic works.

DERBY: It is, and wants but nomination. Visit our archive for more classic works.

LADY ANNE: His better doth not breathe upon the earth.

Messenger: It is spoke freely out of many mouths-- How probable I do not know--that Marcius, Join'd with Aufidius, leads a power 'gainst Rome, And vows revenge as spacious as between The young'st and oldest thing.

HASTINGS: O momentary grace of mortal men, Which we more hunt for than the grace of God! Who builds his hopes in air of your good looks, Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast, Ready, with every nod, to tumble down Into the fatal bowels of the deep.

COMINIUS: That is the way to lay the city flat; To bring the roof to the foundation, And bury all, which yet distinctly ranges, In heaps and piles of ruin.

SICINIUS: Let's not meet her.

HASTINGS: My lord, I hold my life as dear as you do yours; And never in my life, I do protest, Was it more precious to me than 'tis now: Think you, but that I know our state secure, I would be so triumphant as I am?

AUFIDIUS: Say, what's thy name? Thou hast a grim appearance, and thy face Bears a command in't; though thy tackle's torn. Thou show'st a noble vessel: what's thy name?

Page: His name, my lord, is Tyrrel.

VOLUMNIA: I know not where to turn: O, welcome home: And welcome, general: and ye're welcome all. Visit our archive for more classic works.

CORIOLANUS: O the gods!

VALERIA: In earnest, it's true; I heard a senator speak it. Thus it is: the Volsces have an army forth; against whom Cominius the general is gone, with one part of our Roman power: your lord and Titus Lartius are set down before their city Corioli; they nothing doubt prevailing and to make it brief wars. This is true, on mine honour; and so, I pray, go with us.

COMINIUS: Take't; 'tis yours. What is't?

Third Citizen: We have power in ourselves to do it, but it is a power that we have no power to do; for if he show us his wounds and tell us his deeds, we are to put our tongues into those wounds and speak for them; so, if he tell us his noble deeds, we must also tell him our noble acceptance of them. Ingratitude is monstrous, and for the multitude to be ingrateful, were to make a monster of the multitude: of the which we being members, should bring ourselves to be monstrous members.

GLOUCESTER: Well, your imprisonment shall not be long; Meantime, have patience.

VIRGILIA: A crack, madam.

All The People: 'Tear him to pieces.' 'Do it presently.' 'He kill'd my son.' 'My daughter.' 'He killed my cousin Marcus.' 'He killed my father.'

MENENIUS: Has he dined, canst thou tell? for I would not speak with him till after dinner.

CATESBY: My lord! Visit our archive for more classic works.

MENENIUS: Lo, citizens, he says he is content: The warlike service he has done, consider; think Upon the wounds his body bears, which show Like graves i' the holy churchyard. Visit our archive for more classic works.

CORIOLANUS: What makes this change?

AUFIDIUS: O Marcius, Marcius! Each word thou hast spoke hath weeded from my heart A root of ancient envy. If Jupiter Should from yond cloud speak divine things, And say 'Tis true,' I'ld not believe them more Than thee, all noble Marcius. Let me twine Mine arms about that body, where against My grained ash an hundred times hath broke And scarr'd the moon with splinters: here I clip The anvil of my sword, and do contest As hotly and as nobly with thy love As ever in ambitious strength I did Contend against thy valour. Know thou first, I loved the maid I married; never man Sigh'd truer breath; but that I see thee here, Thou noble thing! more dances my rapt heart Than when I first my wedded mistress saw Bestride my threshold. Why, thou Mars! I tell thee, We have a power on foot; and I had purpose Once more to hew thy target from thy brawn, Or lose mine arm fort: thou hast beat me out Twelve several times, and I have nightly since Dreamt of encounters 'twixt thyself and me; We have been down together in my sleep, Unbuckling helms, fisting each other's throat, And waked half dead with nothing. Worthy Marcius, Had we no quarrel else to Rome, but that Thou art thence banish'd, we would muster all From twelve to seventy, and pouring war Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome, Like a bold flood o'er-bear. O, come, go in, And take our friendly senators by the hands; Who now are here, taking their leaves of me, Who am prepared against your territories, Though not for Rome itself.

KING RICHARD III: Why, there thou hast it: two deep enemies, Foes to my rest and my sweet sleep's disturbers Are they that I would have thee deal upon: Tyrrel, I mean those bastards in the Tower.

CORIOLANUS: To brag unto them, thus I did, and thus; Show them the unaching scars which I should hide, As if I had received them for the hire Of their breath only!

AUFIDIUS: There was it: For which my sinews shall be stretch'd upon him. At a few drops of women's rheum, which are As cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labour Of our great action: therefore shall he die, And I'll renew me in his fall. But, hark!

All: Against him first: he's a very dog to the commonalty.

Second Officer: He hath deserved worthily of his country: and his ascent is not by such easy degrees as those who, having been supple and courteous to the people, bonneted, without any further deed to have them at an into their estimation and report: but he hath so planted his honours in their eyes, and his actions in their hearts, that for their tongues to be silent, and not confess so much, were a kind of ingrateful injury; to report otherwise, were a malice, that, giving itself the lie, would pluck reproof and rebuke from every ear that heard it.

All: We will so: almost all Repent in their election.

GLOUCESTER: A gentle cousin, were it light enough.

Third Citizen: We do, sir; tell us what hath brought you to't.

CORIOLANUS: Let go. Visit our archive for more classic works.

All: The gods assist you!

QUEEN ELIZABETH: So just is God, to right the innocent.

VOLUMNIA: He must, and will Prithee now, say you will, and go about it.

GLOUCESTER: He lives that loves thee better than he could.

GLOUCESTER: What, would you have my weapon, little lord?

KING RICHARD III: Shall we hear from thee, Tyrrel, ere we sleep?

CORIOLANUS: Let me but stand; I will not hurt your hearth.

CORIOLANUS: A gentleman.

First Citizen: No,'tis his kind of speech: he did not mock us.

KING RICHARD III: That would I learn of you, As one that are best acquainted with her humour.

MARCIUS: Yonder comes news. A wager they have met.

LARTIUS: Marcius, his name?

BUCKINGHAM: Give me some breath, some little pause, my lord Before I positively herein: I will resolve your grace immediately.

KING EDWARD IV: Then speak at once what is it thou demand'st.

LORD STANLEY: Full of wise care is this your counsel, madam. Take all the swift advantage of the hours; You shall have letters from me to my son To meet you on the way, and welcome you. Be not ta'en tardy by unwise delay.

Second Citizen: Nay, but speak not maliciously.

MENENIUS: Return to the tribunes.

GLOUCESTER: Look, how this ring encompasseth finger. Even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart; Wear both of them, for both of them are thine. And if thy poor devoted suppliant may But beg one favour at thy gracious hand, Thou dost confirm his happiness for ever.

BUCKINGHAM: Say on, my loving lord.

GLOUCESTER: Good morrow to my sovereign king and queen: And, princely peers, a happy time of day!

ARCHBISHOP OF YORK: Why, madam, so, no doubt, he is.

HASTINGS: Go, fellow, go, return unto thy lord; Bid him not fear the separated councils His honour and myself are at the one, And at the other is my servant Catesby Where nothing can proceed that toucheth us Whereof I shall not have intelligence. Tell him his fears are shallow, wanting instance: And for his dreams, I wonder he is so fond To trust the mockery of unquiet slumbers To fly the boar before the boar pursues, Were to incense the boar to follow us And make pursuit where he did mean no chase. Go, bid thy master rise and come to me And we will both together to the Tower, Where, he shall see, the boar will use us kindly.

VOLUMNIA: O, he is wounded; I thank the gods for't.

CORIOLANUS: Mine own desert.

GLOUCESTER: Stay, you that bear the corse, and set it down.

SICINIUS: Let them assemble, And on a safer judgment all revoke Your ignorant election; enforce his pride, And his old hate unto you; besides, forget not With what contempt he wore the humble weed, How in his suit he scorn'd you; but your loves, Thinking upon his services, took from you The apprehension of his present portance, Which most gibingly, ungravely, he did fashion After the inveterate hate he bears you.

MENENIUS: You have told them home; And, by my troth, you have cause. You'll sup with me?

LARTIUS: On safe-guard he came to me; and did curse Against the Volsces, for they had so vilely Yielded the town: he is retired to Antium.

VOLUMNIA: One on 's father's moods.

DUCHESS OF YORK: I am their fathers mother; I will see them.

CATESBY: You shall, my lord.

COMINIUS: Know, I pray you,--

First Citizen: We are accounted poor citizens, the patricians good. What authority surfeits on would relieve us: if they would yield us but the superfluity, while it were wholesome, we might guess they relieved us humanely; but they think we are too dear: the leanness that afflicts us, the object of our misery, is as an inventory to particularise their abundance; our sufferance is a gain to them Let us revenge this with our pikes, ere we become rakes: for the gods know I speak this in hunger for bread, not in thirst for revenge.

HASTINGS: His grace looks cheerfully and smooth to-day; There's some conceit or other likes him well, When he doth bid good morrow with such a spirit. I think there's never a man in Christendom That can less hide his love or hate than he; For by his face straight shall you know his heart.

CATESBY: Many good morrows to my noble lord!

TYRREL: I did, my lord.

DERBY: But now the Duke of Buckingham and I Are come from visiting his majesty.

Second Murderer: And that same vengeance doth he hurl on thee, For false forswearing and for murder too: Thou didst receive the holy sacrament, To fight in quarrel of the house of Lancaster.

Children: Oh for our father, for our dear lord Clarence!

CORIOLANUS: That I'll straight do; and, knowing myself again, Repair to the senate-house.

First Conspirator: How is it with our general?

BUCKINGHAM: You cloudy princes and heart-sorrowing peers, That bear this mutual heavy load of moan, Now cheer each other in each other's love Though we have spent our harvest of this king, We are to reap the harvest of his son. The broken rancour of your high-swoln hearts, But lately splinter'd, knit, and join'd together, Must gently be preserved, cherish'd, and kept: Me seemeth good, that, with some little train, Forthwith from Ludlow the young prince be fetch'd Hither to London, to be crown'd our king.

GLOUCESTER: He may command me as my sovereign; But you have power in me as in a kinsman.

AUFIDIUS: Is it not yours? What ever have been thought on in this state, That could be brought to bodily act ere Rome Had circumvention? 'Tis not four days gone Since I heard thence; these are the words: I think I have the letter here; yes, here it is. 'They have press'd a power, but it is not known Whether for east or west: the dearth is great; The people mutinous; and it is rumour'd, Cominius, Marcius your old enemy, Who is of Rome worse hated than of you, And Titus Lartius, a most valiant Roman, These three lead on this preparation Whither 'tis bent: most likely 'tis for you: Consider of it.'

Messenger: The news is, sir, the Volsces are in arms.

KING RICHARD III: Thou sing'st sweet music. Hark, come hither, Tyrrel Go, by this token: rise, and lend thine ear: There is no more but so: say it is done, And I will love thee, and prefer thee too.

Lieutenant: Fear not our care, sir.

Girl: And so will I.

GLOUCESTER: Yet had not we determined he should die, Until your lordship came to see his death; Which now the loving haste of these our friends, Somewhat against our meaning, have prevented: Because, my lord, we would have had you heard The traitor speak, and timorously confess The manner and the purpose of his treason; That you might well have signified the same Unto the citizens, who haply may Misconstrue us in him and wail his death.

Sixth Citizen: He has done nobly, and cannot go without any honest man's voice.

Third Citizen: And so did I; and, to say the truth, so did very many of us: that we did, we did for the best; and though we willingly consented to his banishment, yet it was against our will.

First Servingman: What an arm he has! he turned me about with his finger and his thumb, as one would set up a top.

BUCKINGHAM: No, by my troth, my lord.

BUCKINGHAM: Good time of day unto your royal grace!

DUCHESS OF YORK: I pray thee, pretty York, who told thee this?

First Officer: No more of him; he is a worthy man: make way, they are coming.

CORIOLANUS: Where? at the senate-house?

VIRGILIA: But had he died in the business, madam; how then?

KING RICHARD III: Know'st thou not any whom corrupting gold Would tempt unto a close exploit of death?

COMINIUS: Away! the tribunes do attend you: arm yourself To answer mildly; for they are prepared With accusations, as I hear, more strong Than are upon you yet.

COMINIUS: Go we to our tent: The blood upon your visage dries; 'tis time It should be look'd to: come.

GLOUCESTER: So dear I loved the man, that I must weep. I took him for the plainest harmless creature That breathed upon this earth a Christian; Made him my book wherein my soul recorded The history of all her secret thoughts: So smooth he daub'd his vice with show of virtue, That, his apparent open guilt omitted, I mean, his conversation with Shore's wife, He lived from all attainder of suspect.

Third Servingman: Reason; because they then less need one another. The wars for my money. I hope to see Romans as cheap as Volscians. They are rising, they are rising.

BUCKINGHAM: Why, then resolve me whether you will or no.

Messenger: And then he sends you word He dreamt to-night the boar had razed his helm: Besides, he says there are two councils held; And that may be determined at the one which may make you and him to rue at the other. Therefore he sends to know your lordship's pleasure, If presently you will take horse with him, And with all speed post with him toward the north, To shun the danger that his soul divines.

VOLUMNIA: Let her alone, lady: as she is now, she will but disease our better mirth.

KING RICHARD III: Well, let it strike.

VIRGILIA: O, no, no, no.

First Servingman: Ay, and for an assault too.

AUFIDIUS: I know it; And my pretext to strike at him admits A good construction. I raised him, and I pawn'd Mine honour for his truth: who being so heighten'd, He water'd his new plants with dews of flattery, Seducing so my friends; and, to this end, He bow'd his nature, never known before But to be rough, unswayable and free.

SICINIUS: This deserves death.

MARCIUS: I'll fight with none but thee; for I do hate thee Worse than a promise-breaker.

CORIOLANUS: Tullus Aufidius then had made new head?

CORIOLANUS: Have you inform'd them sithence?

Third Citizen: Doth this news hold of good King Edward's death?

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Come, come, we know your meaning, brother Gloucester; You envy my advancement and my friends': God grant we never may have need of you!

BRUTUS: Lay A fault on us, your tribunes; that we laboured, No impediment between, but that you must Cast your election on him.

First Senator: A noble fellow, I warrant him.

YORK: Marry, they say my uncle grew so fast That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old 'Twas full two years ere I could get a tooth. Grandam, this would have been a biting jest.

CORIOLANUS: How! traitor!

KING RICHARD III: How chance the prophet could not at that time Have told me, I being by, that I should kill him?

Second Lord: Thou hast done a deed whereat valour will weep.

MARCIUS: I'll buy him of you.

VOLUMNIA: O, no more, no more! You have said you will not grant us any thing; For we have nothing else to ask, but that Which you deny already: yet we will ask; That, if you fail in our request, the blame May hang upon your hardness: therefore hear us.

KING EDWARD IV: Is Clarence dead? the order was reversed.

MENENIUS: Hear me one word; Beseech you, tribunes, hear me but a word.

DERBY: I do beseech you, either not believe The envious slanders of her false accusers; Or, if she be accused in true report, Bear with her weakness, which, I think proceeds From wayward sickness, and no grounded malice.

BUCKINGHAM: Withdraw you hence, my lord, I'll follow you.

LADY ANNE: I fear me both are false.

DUCHESS OF YORK: Hear me a word; For I shall never speak to thee again.

MENENIUS: Be gone; Put not your worthy rage into your tongue; One time will owe another.

SICINIUS: I wish no better Than have him hold that purpose and to put it In execution. Visit our archive for more classic works.

BRAKENBURY: No, madam, no; I may not leave it so: I am bound by oath, and therefore pardon me.

BRUTUS: 'Tis most like he will.

First Senator: Not in this heat, sir, now.

CORIOLANUS: Give me thy hand: Come.

HASTINGS: I thank your grace.

DUCHESS OF YORK: What means this scene of rude impatience?

CORIOLANUS: Must I go show them my unbarbed sconce? Must I with base tongue give my noble heart A lie that it must bear? Well, I will do't: Yet, were there but this single plot to lose, This mould of Marcius, they to dust should grind it And throw't against the wind. To the market-place! You have put me now to such a part which never I shall discharge to the life.

SICINIUS: Especially in pride.

COMINIUS: Marcius, We have at disadvantage fought and did Retire to win our purpose.

Citizens: Faith, we hear fearful news.

LADY ANNE: I would I were, to be revenged on thee.

Second Servingman: An he had been cannibally given, he might have broiled and eaten him too.

SICINIUS: We know your drift: speak what?

Citizens: No, no; no man saw 'em.

AUFIDIUS: Insolent villain!

Citizens: True, The people are the city.

GLOUCESTER: Sweet saint, for charity, be not so curst.

CLARENCE: I must perforce. Farewell.

First Lord: And grieve to hear't. What faults he made before the last, I think Might have found easy fines: but there to end Where he was to begin and give away The benefit of our levies, answering us With our own charge, making a treaty where There was a yielding,--this admits no excuse.

VOLUMNIA: More noble blows than ever thou wise words; And for Rome's good. I'll tell thee what; yet go: Nay, but thou shalt stay too: I would my son Were in Arabia, and thy tribe before him, His good sword in his hand.

LARTIUS: Thou worthiest Marcius! Go, sound thy trumpet in the market-place; Call thither all the officers o' the town, Where they shall know our mind: away!

CORIOLANUS: O that I had him, With six Aufidiuses, or more, his tribe, To use my lawful sword!

CLARENCE: Erroneous vassal! the great King of kings Hath in the tables of his law commanded That thou shalt do no murder: and wilt thou, then, Spurn at his edict and fulfil a man's? Take heed; for he holds vengeance in his hands, To hurl upon their heads that break his law.

QUEEN MARGARET: Why, so I did; but look'd for no reply. O, let me make the period to my curse!

CORIOLANUS: First, hear me speak.

QUEEN MARGARET: Urge neither charity nor shame to me: Uncharitably with me have you dealt, And shamefully by you my hopes are butcher'd. My charity is outrage, life my shame And in that shame still live my sorrow's rage.

CORIOLANUS: On fair ground I could beat forty of them.

RIVERS: And so in me; and so, I think, in all: Yet, since it is but green, it should be put To no apparent likelihood of breach, Which haply by much company might be urged: Therefore I say with noble Buckingham, That it is meet so few should fetch the prince.

CORIOLANUS: Follow your function, go, and batten on cold bits.

VALERIA: Well, then, farewell.

LADY ANNE: Fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst make No excuse current, but to hang thyself.

GLOUCESTER: I cannot tell: the world is grown so bad, That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch: Since every Jack became a gentleman There's many a gentle person made a Jack.

YORK: Then is he more beholding to you than I.

BUCKINGHAM: Now, by the holy mother of our Lord, The citizens are mum and speak not a word.

BUCKINGHAM: Even that, I hope, which pleaseth God above, And all good men of this ungovern'd isle.

AUFIDIUS: Sir, I cannot tell: We must proceed as we do find the people.

SICINIUS: The custom of request you have discharged: The people do admit you, and are summon'd To meet anon, upon your approbation.

MARCIUS: O, they are at it!

GLOUCESTER: My other self, my counsel's consistory, My oracle, my prophet! My dear cousin, I, like a child, will go by thy direction. Towards Ludlow then, for we'll not stay behind.

SICINIUS: 'Tis right.

KING RICHARD III: All unavoided is the doom of destiny.

MENENIUS: We are all undone, unless The noble man have mercy.

MARCIUS: Will the time serve to tell? I do not think. Where is the enemy? are you lords o' the field? If not, why cease you till you are so?

Volsce: You take my part from me, sir; I have the most cause to be glad of yours.

PRINCE EDWARD: My lord protector needs will have it so.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: What good is cover'd with the face of heaven, To be discover'd, that can do me good?

BUCKINGHAM: My lord, whoever journeys to the Prince, For God's sake, let not us two be behind; For, by the way, I'll sort occasion, As index to the story we late talk'd of, To part the queen's proud kindred from the king.

SICINIUS: Friend, Art thou certain this is true? is it most certain?

BRUTUS: But since he hath Served well for Rome,--

KING RICHARD III: Her life is only safest in her birth.

First Lord: Peace, both, and hear me speak.

DUCHESS OF YORK: So many miseries have crazed my voice, That my woe-wearied tongue is mute and dumb, Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead?

LADY ANNE: Never hung poison on a fouler toad. Out of my sight! thou dost infect my eyes.

HASTINGS: Good morrow, Catesby; you are early stirring What news, what news, in this our tottering state?

BRUTUS: How! I inform them!

Volsce: A most royal one; the centurions and their charges, distinctly billeted, already in the entertainment, and to be on foot at an hour's warning.

First Servingman: What, what, what? let's partake.

MENENIUS: 'Tis Aufidius, Who, hearing of our Marcius' banishment, Thrusts forth his horns again into the world; Which were inshell'd when Marcius stood for Rome, And durst not once peep out.

Boy: Why do you wring your hands, and beat your breast, And cry 'O Clarence, my unhappy son!'

MENENIUS: I think not so.

GLOUCESTER: Madam, have comfort: all of us have cause To wail the dimming of our shining star; But none can cure their harms by wailing them. Madam, my mother, I do cry you mercy; I did not see your grace: humbly on my knee I crave your blessing.

BRAKENBURY: I beseech your grace to pardon me, and withal Forbear your conference with the noble duke.

AUFIDIUS: Only their ends You have respected; stopp'd your ears against The general suit of Rome; never admitted A private whisper, no, not with such friends That thought them sure of you.

Third Servingman: What, you will not? Prithee, tell my master what a strange guest he has here.

First Citizen: Care for us! True, indeed! They ne'er cared for us yet: suffer us to famish, and their store-houses crammed with grain; make edicts for usury, to support usurers; repeal daily any wholesome act established against the rich, and provide more piercing statutes daily, to chain up and restrain the poor. If the wars eat us not up, they will; and there's all the love they bear us.

COMINIUS: I think 'twill serve, if he Can thereto frame his spirit.

SICINIUS: For that he has, As much as in him lies, from time to time Envied against the people, seeking means To pluck away their power, as now at last Given hostile strokes, and that not in the presence Of dreaded justice, but on the ministers That do distribute it; in the name o' the people And in the power of us the tribunes, we, Even from this instant, banish him our city, In peril of precipitation From off the rock Tarpeian never more To enter our Rome gates: i' the people's name, I say it shall be so.

Lord Mayor: God bless your grace! we see it, and will say it.

GLOUCESTER: Go you before, and I will follow you. He cannot live, I hope; and must not die Till George be pack'd with post-horse up to heaven. I'll in, to urge his hatred more to Clarence, With lies well steel'd with weighty arguments; And, if I fall not in my deep intent, Clarence hath not another day to live: Which done, God take King Edward to his mercy, And leave the world for me to bustle in! For then I'll marry Warwick's youngest daughter. What though I kill'd her husband and her father? The readiest way to make the wench amends Is to become her husband and her father: The which will I; not all so much for love As for another secret close intent, By marrying her which I must reach unto. But yet I run before my horse to market: Clarence still breathes; Edward still lives and reigns: When they are gone, then must I count my gains.

First Citizen: And to make us no better thought of, a little help will serve; for once we stood up about the corn, he himself stuck not to call us the many-headed multitude.

First Citizen: If I must not, I need not be barren of accusations; he hath faults, with surplus, to tire in repetition. What shouts are these? The other side o' the city is risen: why stay we prating here? to the Capitol!

BUCKINGHAM: Then know, it is your fault that you resign The supreme seat, the throne majestical, The scepter'd office of your ancestors, Your state of fortune and your due of birth, The lineal glory of your royal house, To the corruption of a blemished stock: Whilst, in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts, Which here we waken to our country's good, This noble isle doth want her proper limbs; Her face defaced with scars of infamy, Her royal stock graft with ignoble plants, And almost shoulder'd in the swallowing gulf Of blind forgetfulness and dark oblivion. Which to recure, we heartily solicit Your gracious self to take on you the charge And kingly government of this your land, Not as protector, steward, substitute, Or lowly factor for another's gain; But as successively from blood to blood, Your right of birth, your empery, your own. For this, consorted with the citizens, Your very worshipful and loving friends, And by their vehement instigation, In this just suit come I to move your grace.

MENENIUS: Pray you, be gone: I'll try whether my old wit be in request With those that have but little: this must be patch'd With cloth of any colour.

LARTIUS: So, the good horse is mine. Visit our archive for more classic works.

CORIOLANUS: Now, as I live, I will. My nobler friends, I crave their pardons: For the mutable, rank-scented many, let them Regard me as I do not flatter, and Therein behold themselves: I say again, In soothing them, we nourish 'gainst our senate The cockle of rebellion, insolence, sedition, Which we ourselves have plough'd for, sow'd, and scatter'd, By mingling them with us, the honour'd number, Who lack not virtue, no, nor power, but that Which they have given to beggars.

SICINIUS: What is the city but the people?

CORIOLANUS: No, I serve not thy master.

SICINIUS: What do ye talk? Have we not had a taste of his obedience? Our aediles smote? ourselves resisted? Come.

ANOTHER: Do, good my lord, lest all the land do rue it. Visit our archive for more classic works.

BUCKINGHAM: Fie, what an indirect and peevish course Is this of hers! Lord cardinal, will your grace Persuade the queen to send the Duke of York Unto his princely brother presently? If she deny, Lord Hastings, go with him, And from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.

DUCHESS OF YORK: I hope he is; but yet let mothers doubt.

MENENIUS: O me, the gods! You must not speak of that: you must desire them To think upon you.

AEdile: Peace, peace! Visit our archive for more classic works.

DUCHESS OF YORK: Accursed and unquiet wrangling days, How many of you have mine eyes beheld! My husband lost his life to get the crown; And often up and down my sons were toss'd, For me to joy and weep their gain and loss: And being seated, and domestic broils Clean over-blown, themselves, the conquerors. Make war upon themselves; blood against blood, Self against self: O, preposterous And frantic outrage, end thy damned spleen; Or let me die, to look on death no more!

BRAKENBURY: What one, my lord?

SICINIUS: We should by this, to all our lamentation, If he had gone forth consul, found it so.

LARTIUS: My horse to yours, no.

KING RICHARD III: You have a daughter call'd Elizabeth, Virtuous and fair, royal and gracious.

First Murderer: How now! what mean'st thou, that thou help'st me not? By heavens, the duke shall know how slack thou art!

Messenger: Within this mile and half.

LORD STANLEY: They, for their truth, might better wear their heads Than some that have accused them wear their hats. But come, my lord, let us away.

HASTINGS: Woe, woe for England! not a whit for me; For I, too fond, might have prevented this. Stanley did dream the boar did raze his helm; But I disdain'd it, and did scorn to fly: Three times to-day my foot-cloth horse did stumble, And startled, when he look'd upon the Tower, As loath to bear me to the slaughter-house. O, now I want the priest that spake to me: I now repent I told the pursuivant As 'twere triumphing at mine enemies, How they at Pomfret bloodily were butcher'd, And I myself secure in grace and favour. O Margaret, Margaret, now thy heavy curse Is lighted on poor Hastings' wretched head!

COMINIUS: Help Marcius, help, You that be noble; help him, young and old!

SICINIUS: Bid them home: Say their great enemy is gone, and they Stand in their ancient strength.

GLOUCESTER: My lord, there needs no such apology: I rather do beseech you pardon me, Who, earnest in the service of my God, Neglect the visitation of my friends. But, leaving this, what is your grace's pleasure?

First Citizen: Ye're long about it.

First Servingman: Wherefore? wherefore?

LADY ANNE: Name him.

BUCKINGHAM: Are all things fitting for that royal time?

Second Messenger: Good news, good news; the ladies have prevail'd, The Volscians are dislodged, and Marcius gone: A merrier day did never yet greet Rome, No, not the expulsion of the Tarquins.

LARTIUS: No, I'll nor sell nor give him: lend you him I will For half a hundred years. Summon the town. Visit our archive for more classic works.

BUCKINGHAM: Nor no one here; for curses never pass The lips of those that breathe them in the air.

DORSET: No man but prophesied revenge for it.

Roman: I shall, between this and supper, tell you most strange things from Rome; all tending to the good of their adversaries. Have you an army ready, say you?

COMINIUS: Come, sir, along with us.

Second Citizen: I promise you, I scarcely know myself: Hear you the news abroad?

CLARENCE: In God's name, what art thou?

VIRGILIA: No, good madam, pardon me; indeed, I will not forth.

VALERIA: Come, lay aside your stitchery; I must have you play the idle husewife with me this afternoon.

CORIOLANUS: A goodly city is this Antium. City, 'Tis I that made thy widows: many an heir Of these fair edifices 'fore my wars Have I heard groan and drop: then know me not, Lest that thy wives with spits and boys with stones In puny battle slay me. Save you, sir.

HASTINGS: On what occasion, God he knows, not I, The queen your mother, and your brother York, Have taken sanctuary: the tender prince Would fain have come with me to meet your grace, But by his mother was perforce withheld.

DUCHESS OF YORK: O ill-dispersing wind of misery! O my accursed womb, the bed of death! A cockatrice hast thou hatch'd to the world, Whose unavoided eye is murderous.

RIVERS: She may, my lord, for--

LARTIUS: He had, my lord; and that it was which caused Our swifter composition.

CORIOLANUS: Ay, but not mine own desire.

LADY ANNE: Thou wast provoked by thy bloody mind. Which never dreamt on aught but butcheries: Didst thou not kill this king?

VOLUMNIA: These are the ushers of Marcius: before him he carries noise, and behind him he leaves tears: Death, that dark spirit, in 's nervy arm doth lie; Which, being advanced, declines, and then men die.

KING RICHARD III: O bitter consequence, That Edward still should live! 'True, noble prince!' Cousin, thou wert not wont to be so dull: Shall I be plain? I wish the bastards dead; And I would have it suddenly perform'd. What sayest thou? speak suddenly; be brief.

QUEEN MARGARET: Which God revenge!

CORIOLANUS: You should account me the more virtuous that I have not been common in my love. I will, sir, flatter my sworn brother, the people, to earn a dearer estimation of them; 'tis a condition they account gentle: and since the wisdom of their choice is rather to have my hat than my heart, I will practise the insinuating nod and be off to them most counterfeitly; that is, sir, I will counterfeit the bewitchment of some popular man and give it bountiful to the desirers. Therefore, beseech you, I may be consul.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Be brief, lest that be process of thy kindness Last longer telling than thy kindness' date.

COMINIUS: So, to our tent; Where, ere we do repose us, we will write To Rome of our success. You, Titus Lartius, Must to Corioli back: send us to Rome The best, with whom we may articulate, For their own good and ours.

LADY ANNE: In thy foul throat thou liest: Queen Margaret saw Thy murderous falchion smoking in his blood; The which thou once didst bend against her breast, But that thy brothers beat aside the point.

DUCHESS OF YORK: Why should calamity be full of words? Visit our archive for more classic works.

SICINIUS: He shall be thrown down the Tarpeian rock With rigorous hands: he hath resisted law, And therefore law shall scorn him further trial Than the severity of the public power Which he so sets at nought.

BUCKINGHAM: I am thus bold to put your grace in mind Of what you promised me.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: The loss of such a lord includes all harm.

Second Citizen: One word, good citizens.

MENENIUS: And so are like to do.

Third Lord: Tread not upon him. Masters all, be quiet; Put up your swords.

SICINIUS: Answer to us.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Hidest thou that forehead with a golden crown, Where should be graven, if that right were right, The slaughter of the prince that owed that crown, And the dire death of my two sons and brothers? Tell me, thou villain slave, where are my children?

SICINIUS: 'Twere well We let the people know't.

MARCIUS: He that will give good words to thee will flatter Beneath abhorring. What would you have, you curs, That like nor peace nor war? the one affrights you, The other makes you proud. He that trusts to you, Where he should find you lions, finds you hares; Where foxes, geese: you are no surer, no, Than is the coal of fire upon the ice, Or hailstone in the sun. Your virtue is To make him worthy whose offence subdues him And curse that justice did it. Who deserves greatness Deserves your hate; and your affections are A sick man's appetite, who desires most that Which would increase his evil. He that depends Upon your favours swims with fins of lead And hews down oaks with rushes. Hang ye! Trust Ye? With every minute you do change a mind, And call him noble that was now your hate, Him vile that was your garland. What's the matter, That in these several places of the city You cry against the noble senate, who, Under the gods, keep you in awe, which else Would feed on one another? What's their seeking?

CORIOLANUS: I do owe them still My life and services.

SICINIUS: Speak briefly then; For we are peremptory to dispatch This viperous traitor: to eject him hence Were but one danger, and to keep him here Our certain death: therefore it is decreed He dies to-night.

COMINIUS: Too modest are you; More cruel to your good report than grateful To us that give you truly: by your patience, If 'gainst yourself you be incensed, we'll put you, Like one that means his proper harm, in manacles, Then reason safely with you. Therefore, be it known, As to us, to all the world, that Caius Marcius Wears this war's garland: in token of the which, My noble steed, known to the camp, I give him, With all his trim belonging; and from this time, For what he did before Corioli, call him, With all the applause and clamour of the host, CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS! Bear The addition nobly ever!

All: In, in, in, in!

Second Citizen: You shall ha' it, worthy sir.

RIVERS: A virtuous and a Christian-like conclusion, To pray for them that have done scathe to us.

First Citizen: Our business is not unknown to the senate; they have had inkling this fortnight what we intend to do, which now we'll show 'em in deeds. They say poor suitors have strong breaths: they shall know we have strong arms too.

LARTIUS: Now the fair goddess, Fortune, Fall deep in love with thee; and her great charms Misguide thy opposers' swords! Bold gentleman, Prosperity be thy page!

TYRREL: Ye shall, my Lord.

CLARENCE: My brother's love, the devil, and my rage.

GLOUCESTER: Alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours; He should, for that, commit your godfathers: O, belike his majesty hath some intent That you shall be new-christen'd in the Tower. But what's the matter, Clarence? may I know?

Third Citizen: Woe to the land that's govern'd by a child!

QUEEN ELIZABETH: O, thou didst prophesy the time would come That I should wish for thee to help me curse That bottled spider, that foul bunch-back'd toad!

Volsce: You had more beard when I last saw you; but your favour is well approved by your tongue. What's the news in Rome? I have a note from the Volscian state, to find you out there: you have well saved me a day's journey.

MENENIUS: Hear me speak: As I do know the consul's worthiness, So can I name his faults,--

SICINIUS: The gods be good unto us!

DERBY: God make your majesty joyful as you have been! Visit our archive for more classic works.

MENENIUS: There was a time when all the body's members Rebell'd against the belly, thus accused it: That only like a gulf it did remain I' the midst o' the body, idle and unactive, Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing Like labour with the rest, where the other instruments Did see and hear, devise, instruct, walk, feel, And, mutually participate, did minister Unto the appetite and affection common Of the whole body. The belly answer'd--

AUFIDIUS: Condition! I would I were a Roman; for I cannot, Being a Volsce, be that I am. Condition! What good condition can a treaty find I' the part that is at mercy? Five times, Marcius, I have fought with thee: so often hast thou beat me, And wouldst do so, I think, should we encounter As often as we eat. By the elements, If e'er again I meet him beard to beard, He's mine, or I am his: mine emulation Hath not that honour in't it had; for where I thought to crush him in an equal force, True sword to sword, I'll potch at him some way Or wrath or craft may get him.

GLOUCESTER: Even when you please, since you will have it so.

CORIOLANUS: What's the matter?

RIVERS: Madam, we will attend your grace.

All: Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!

TYRREL: 'Tis done, my gracious lord.

Second Senator: Farewell.

KING RICHARD III: Ay, what's o'clock?

First Citizen: Soft! who comes here? Visit our archive for more classic works.

VIRGILIA: Indeed, no, by your patience; I'll not over the threshold till my lord return from the wars.

BRUTUS: He's a lamb indeed, that baes like a bear.

VOLUMNIA: Away, you fool! it more becomes a man Than gilt his trophy: the breasts of Hecuba, When she did suckle Hector, look'd not lovelier Than Hector's forehead when it spit forth blood At Grecian sword, contemning. Tell Valeria, We are fit to bid her welcome.

COMINIUS: I could myself Take up a brace o' the best of them; yea, the two tribunes: But now 'tis odds beyond arithmetic; And manhood is call'd foolery, when it stands Against a falling fabric. Will you hence, Before the tag return? whose rage doth rend Like interrupted waters and o'erbear What they are used to bear.

BRUTUS: The aediles, ho! Let him be apprehended.

Second Citizen: Think you so? Which way do you judge my wit would fly?

HASTINGS: Gramercy, fellow: there, drink that for me.

PRINCE EDWARD: I do not like the Tower, of any place. Did Julius Caesar build that place, my lord?

BRUTUS: So it must fall out To him or our authorities. For an end, We must suggest the people in what hatred He still hath held them; that to's power he would Have made them mules, silenced their pleaders and Dispropertied their freedoms, holding them, In human action and capacity, Of no more soul nor fitness for the world Than camels in the war, who have their provand Only for bearing burdens, and sore blows For sinking under them.

COMINIUS: O, you have made good work!

Citizens: Now the gods keep you!

BRUTUS: I heard him swear, Were he to stand for consul, never would he Appear i' the market-place nor on him put The napless vesture of humility; Nor showing, as the manner is, his wounds To the people, beg their stinking breaths.

Second murderer: You shall have wine enough, my lord, anon.

MENENIUS: What, what? his choler?

MARCIUS: Let the first budger die the other's slave, And the gods doom him after!

GLOUCESTER: Then never man was true.

CORIOLANUS: May I change these garments?

BRUTUS: Get you hence instantly, and tell those friends, They have chose a consul that will from them take Their liberties; make them of no more voice Than dogs that are as often beat for barking As therefore kept to do so.

GLOUCESTER: As much unto my good lord chamberlain! Well are you welcome to the open air. How hath your lordship brook'd imprisonment?

SICINIUS: He loved his mother dearly.

GLOUCESTER: More wonderful, when angels are so angry. Vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman, Of these supposed-evils, to give me leave, By circumstance, but to acquit myself.

CORIOLANUS: And live you yet? O my sweet lady, pardon.

CORIOLANUS: Most sweet voices! Better it is to die, better to starve, Than crave the hire which first we do deserve. Why in this woolvish toge should I stand here, To beg of Hob and Dick, that do appear, Their needless vouches? Custom calls me to't: What custom wills, in all things should we do't, The dust on antique time would lie unswept, And mountainous error be too highly heapt For truth to o'er-peer. Rather than fool it so, Let the high office and the honour go To one that would do thus. I am half through; The one part suffer'd, the other will I do. Here come more voices. Your voices: for your voices I have fought; Watch'd for your voices; for Your voices bear Of wounds two dozen odd; battles thrice six I have seen and heard of; for your voices have Done many things, some less, some more your voices: Indeed I would be consul.

MENENIUS: Is this the promise that you made your mother?

CORIOLANUS: My name is Caius Marcius, who hath done To thee particularly and to all the Volsces Great hurt and mischief; thereto witness may My surname, Coriolanus: the painful service, The extreme dangers and the drops of blood Shed for my thankless country are requited But with that surname; a good memory, And witness of the malice and displeasure Which thou shouldst bear me: only that name remains; The cruelty and envy of the people, Permitted by our dastard nobles, who Have all forsook me, hath devour'd the rest; And suffer'd me by the voice of slaves to be Whoop'd out of Rome. Now this extremity Hath brought me to thy hearth; not out of hope-- Mistake me not--to save my life, for if I had fear'd death, of all the men i' the world I would have 'voided thee, but in mere spite, To be full quit of those my banishers, Stand I before thee here. Then if thou hast A heart of wreak in thee, that wilt revenge Thine own particular wrongs and stop those maims Of shame seen through thy country, speed thee straight, And make my misery serve thy turn: so use it That my revengeful services may prove As benefits to thee, for I will fight Against my canker'd country with the spleen Of all the under fiends. But if so be Thou darest not this and that to prove more fortunes Thou'rt tired, then, in a word, I also am Longer to live most weary, and present My throat to thee and to thy ancient malice; Which not to cut would show thee but a fool, Since I have ever follow'd thee with hate, Drawn tuns of blood out of thy country's breast, And cannot live but to thy shame, unless It be to do thee service.

CORIOLANUS: Prepare thy brow to frown: know'st thou me yet?

GLOUCESTER: Chop off his head, man; somewhat we will do: And, look, when I am king, claim thou of me The earldom of Hereford, and the moveables Whereof the king my brother stood possess'd.