Second Murderer: Take the devil in thy mind, and relieve him not: he would insinuate with thee but to make thee sigh.

asdkjhaskjdh aksjdh aksjdhaksjdh

SICINIUS: I would he had continued to his country As he began, and not unknit himself The noble knot he made.

BUCKINGHAM: Who knows the lord protector's mind herein? Who is most inward with the royal duke? Visit our archive for more classic works.

Second Murderer: Never, my lord; therefore prepare to die.

CLARENCE: Not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish. Which of you, if you were a prince's son, Being pent from liberty, as I am now, if two such murderers as yourselves came to you, Would not entreat for life? My friend, I spy some pity in thy looks: O, if thine eye be not a flatterer, Come thou on my side, and entreat for me, As you would beg, were you in my distress A begging prince what beggar pities not?

First Servingman: Ay, and it makes men hate one another.

SICINIUS: Be-mock the modest moon.

Senators, &C: Weapons, weapons, weapons! 'Tribunes!' 'Patricians!' 'Citizens!' 'What, ho!' 'Sicinius!' 'Brutus!' 'Coriolanus!' 'Citizens!' 'Peace, peace, peace!' 'Stay, hold, peace!'

Lords: Hold, hold, hold, hold!

KING RICHARD III: But didst thou see them dead?

MENENIUS: Good faith, I'll prove him, Speed how it will. I shall ere long have knowledge Of my success.

MENENIUS: Now, you companion, I'll say an errand for you: You shall know now that I am in estimation; you shall perceive that a Jack guardant cannot office me from my son Coriolanus: guess, but by my entertainment with him, if thou standest not i' the state of hanging, or of some death more long in spectatorship, and crueller in suffering; behold now presently, and swoon for what's to come upon thee. The glorious gods sit in hourly synod about thy particular prosperity, and love thee no worse than thy old father Menenius does! O my son, my son! thou art preparing fire for us; look thee, here's water to quench it. I was hardly moved to come to thee; but being assured none but myself could move thee, I have been blown out of your gates with sighs; and conjure thee to pardon Rome, and thy petitionary countrymen. The good gods assuage thy wrath, and turn the dregs of it upon this varlet here,--this, who, like a block, hath denied my access to thee.

RATCLIFF: Come, bring forth the prisoners.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: O, cut my lace in sunder, that my pent heart May have some scope to beat, or else I swoon With this dead-killing news!

SICINIUS: Doubt not The commoners, for whom we stand, but they Upon their ancient malice will forget With the least cause these his new honours, which That he will give them make I as little question As he is proud to do't.

GLOUCESTER: Then be it so; and go we to determine Who they shall be that straight shall post to Ludlow. Madam, and you, my mother, will you go To give your censures in this weighty business?

CLARENCE: O, no, he loves me, and he holds me dear: Go you to him from me.

SICINIUS: They are near the city?

BRUTUS: With a proud heart he wore his humble weeds. will you dismiss the people?

KING RICHARD III: Madam, with all my heart.

Third Conspirator: Therefore, at your vantage, Ere he express himself, or move the people With what he would say, let him feel your sword, Which we will second. When he lies along, After your way his tale pronounced shall bury His reasons with his body.

GLOUCESTER: Well thought upon; I have it here about me. When you have done, repair to Crosby Place. But, sirs, be sudden in the execution, Withal obdurate, do not hear him plead; For Clarence is well-spoken, and perhaps May move your hearts to pity if you mark him.

GLOUCESTER: Be patient, they are friends, Ratcliff and Lovel.

QUEEN MARGARET: And leave out thee? stay, dog, for thou shalt hear me. If heaven have any grievous plague in store Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee, O, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe, And then hurl down their indignation On thee, the troubler of the poor world's peace! The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul! Thy friends suspect for traitors while thou livest, And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends! No sleep close up that deadly eye of thine, Unless it be whilst some tormenting dream Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils! Thou elvish-mark'd, abortive, rooting hog! Thou that wast seal'd in thy nativity The slave of nature and the son of hell! Thou slander of thy mother's heavy womb! Thou loathed issue of thy father's loins! Thou rag of honour! thou detested--

GLOUCESTER: I did not kill your husband.

GLOUCESTER: Curse not thyself, fair creature thou art both.

CORIOLANUS: I will not seal your knowledge with showing them. I will make much of your voices, and so trouble you no further.

MARCIUS: O, let me clip ye In arms as sound as when I woo'd, in heart As merry as when our nuptial day was done, And tapers burn'd to bedward! Visit our archive for more classic works.

SICINIUS: One thus descended, That hath beside well in his person wrought To be set high in place, we did commend To your remembrances: but you have found, Scaling his present bearing with his past, That he's your fixed enemy, and revoke Your sudden approbation.

GLOUCESTER: I say, without characters, fame lives long. Thus, like the formal vice, Iniquity, I moralize two meanings in one word.

MENENIUS: You guard like men; 'tis well: but, by your leave, I am an officer of state, and come To speak with Coriolanus.

AUFIDIUS: I have not deserved it. But, worthy lords, have you with heed perused What I have written to you?

HASTINGS: What is't o'clock? Visit our archive for more classic works.

COMINIUS: I minded him how royal 'twas to pardon When it was less expected: he replied, It was a bare petition of a state To one whom they had punish'd.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Farewell, thou woful welcomer of glory!

PRINCE EDWARD: Richard of York! how fares our loving brother?

GLOUCESTER: Yes, one place else, if you will hear me name it.

HASTINGS: Good faith, and when I met this holy man, Those men you talk of came into my mind. What, go you toward the Tower?

CORIOLANUS: I do beseech you, Let me o'erleap that custom, for I cannot Put on the gown, stand naked and entreat them, For my wounds' sake, to give their suffrage: please you That I may pass this doing.

Citizens: Our enemy is banish'd! he is gone! Hoo! hoo! Visit our archive for more classic works.

VALERIA: You would be another Penelope: yet, they say, all the yarn she spun in Ulysses' absence did but fill Ithaca full of moths. Come; I would your cambric were sensible as your finger, that you might leave pricking it for pity. Come, you shall go with us.

SICINIUS: Fare you well. He has it now, and by his looks methink 'Tis warm at 's heart.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: With all our harts.

Boy: Good aunt, you wept not for our father's death; How can we aid you with our kindred tears?

Third Citizen: Nay, your wit will not so soon out as another man's will;'tis strongly wedged up in a block-head, but if it were at liberty, 'twould, sure, southward.

VALERIA: In troth, I think she would. Fare you well, then. Come, good sweet lady. Prithee, Virgilia, turn thy solemness out o' door. and go along with us.

First Murderer: How if it come to thee again?

First Senator: Speak, good Cominius: Leave nothing out for length, and make us think Rather our state's defective for requital Than we to stretch it out. Masters o' the people, We do request your kindest ears, and after, Your loving motion toward the common body, To yield what passes here.

QUEEN MARGARET: Poor painted queen, vain flourish of my fortune! Why strew'st thou sugar on that bottled spider, Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about? Fool, fool! thou whet'st a knife to kill thyself. The time will come when thou shalt wish for me To help thee curse that poisonous bunchback'd toad.

CORIOLANUS: Worthy voices!

CORIOLANUS: Well then, I pray, your price o' the consulship?

<div class='ad'>CLICK HERE FOR MORE</div>

LADY ANNE: Why, then he is alive.

COMINIUS: Noble Marcius! Visit our archive for more classic works.

CARDINAL: My lord, you shall o'er-rule my mind for once. Come on, Lord Hastings, will you go with me?

YORK: I shall not sleep in quiet at the Tower.

LADY ANNE: Dost grant me, hedgehog? then, God grant me too Thou mayst be damned for that wicked deed! O, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous!

Citizen: This, here before you.

AUFIDIUS: If I fly, Marcius, Holloa me like a hare.

AEdile: The people's enemy is gone, is gone!

AUFIDIUS: Bolder, though not so subtle. My valour's poison'd With only suffering stain by him; for him Shall fly out of itself: nor sleep nor sanctuary, Being naked, sick, nor fane nor Capitol, The prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice, Embarquements all of fury, shall lift up Their rotten privilege and custom 'gainst My hate to Marcius: where I find him, were it At home, upon my brother's guard, even there, Against the hospitable canon, would I Wash my fierce hand in's heart. Go you to the city; Learn how 'tis held; and what they are that must Be hostages for Rome.

HASTINGS: No news so bad abroad as this at home; The King is sickly, weak and melancholy, And his physicians fear him mightily. Visit our archive for more classic works.

KING RICHARD III: Well, but what's o'clock?

YORK: I thank you, gentle uncle. O, my lord, You said that idle weeds are fast in growth The prince my brother hath outgrown me far.

BUCKINGHAM: Why let it strike?

QUEEN ELIZABETH: My Lord of Gloucester, I have too long borne Your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs: By heaven, I will acquaint his majesty With those gross taunts I often have endured. I had rather be a country servant-maid Than a great queen, with this condition, To be thus taunted, scorn'd, and baited at: Small joy have I in being England's queen.

AUFIDIUS: That I would have spoke of: Being banish'd for't, he came unto my hearth; Presented to my knife his throat: I took him; Made him joint-servant with me; gave him way In all his own desires; nay, let him choose Out of my files, his projects to accomplish, My best and freshest men; served his designments In mine own person; holp to reap the fame Which he did end all his; and took some pride To do myself this wrong: till, at the last, I seem'd his follower, not partner, and He waged me with his countenance, as if I had been mercenary.

SICINIUS: Nature teaches beasts to know their friends.

QUEEN MARGARET: Out, devil! I remember them too well: Thou slewest my husband Henry in the Tower, And Edward, my poor son, at Tewksbury.

TYRREL: Let me have open means to come to them, And soon I'll rid you from the fear of them.

CORIOLANUS: It is apart That I shall blush in acting, and might well Be taken from the people.

BRUTUS: Mark you that?

GLOUCESTER: 'Tis figured in my tongue.

Citizens: Down with him! down with him!

MENENIUS: Hail to you both!

CORIOLANUS: Spoke he of me?

QUEEN ELIZABETH: As little joy, my lord, as you suppose You should enjoy, were you this country's king, As little joy may you suppose in me. That I enjoy, being the queen thereof.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Ah, my young princes! ah, my tender babes! My unblown flowers, new-appearing sweets! If yet your gentle souls fly in the air And be not fix'd in doom perpetual, Hover about me with your airy wings And hear your mother's lamentation! Visit our archive for more classic works.

TYRREL: The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them; But how or in what place I do not know.

Both Tribunes: Hail sir!

BUCKINGHAM: You are too senseless--obstinate, my lord, Too ceremonious and traditional Weigh it but with the grossness of this age, You break not sanctuary in seizing him. The benefit thereof is always granted To those whose dealings have deserved the place, And those who have the wit to claim the place: This prince hath neither claim'd it nor deserved it; And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it: Then, taking him from thence that is not there, You break no privilege nor charter there. Oft have I heard of sanctuary men; But sanctuary children ne'er till now.

MARCIUS: Five tribunes to defend their vulgar wisdoms, Of their own choice: one's Junius Brutus, Sicinius Velutus, and I know not--'Sdeath! The rabble should have first unroof'd the city, Ere so prevail'd with me: it will in time Win upon power and throw forth greater themes For insurrection's arguing.

BUCKINGHAM: What, talking with a priest, lord chamberlain? Your friends at Pomfret, they do need the priest; Your honour hath no shriving work in hand.

Third Servingman: Why, he is so made on here within, as if he were son and heir to Mars; set at upper end o' the table; no question asked him by any of the senators, but they stand bald before him: our general himself makes a mistress of him: sanctifies himself with's hand and turns up the white o' the eye to his discourse. But the bottom of the news is that our general is cut i' the middle and but one half of what he was yesterday; for the other has half, by the entreaty and grant of the whole table. He'll go, he says, and sowl the porter of Rome gates by the ears: he will mow all down before him, and leave his passage polled.

LADY ANNE: And I in all unwillingness will go. I would to God that the inclusive verge Of golden metal that must round my brow Were red-hot steel, to sear me to the brain! Anointed let me be with deadly venom, And die, ere men can say, God save the queen!

SICINIUS: He's a disease that must be cut away.

CORIOLANUS: Hence, old goat!

Citizens: Let's hear our tribune: peace Speak, speak, speak.

First Citizen: Before we proceed any further, hear me speak.

Second Senator: You'll see your Rome embraced with fire before You'll speak with Coriolanus.

BUCKINGHAM: Well, then, no more but this: go, gentle Catesby, And, as it were far off sound thou Lord Hastings, How doth he stand affected to our purpose; And summon him to-morrow to the Tower, To sit about the coronation. If thou dost find him tractable to us, Encourage him, and show him all our reasons: If he be leaden, icy-cold, unwilling, Be thou so too; and so break off your talk, And give us notice of his inclination: For we to-morrow hold divided councils, Wherein thyself shalt highly be employ'd.

GLOUCESTER: What tongueless blocks were they! would not they speak?

First Senator: Sit, Coriolanus; never shame to hear What you have nobly done.

BUCKINGHAM: Lord mayor,--

BUCKINGHAM: Fear not, my lord, I'll play the orator As if the golden fee for which I plead Were for myself: and so, my lord, adieu.

Second Murderer: O excellent devise! make a sop of him.

BRUTUS: Being moved, he will not spare to gird the gods.

DORSET: Ay, my good lord; and no one in this presence But his red colour hath forsook his cheeks.

CLARENCE: It cannot be; for when I parted with him, He hugg'd me in his arms, and swore, with sobs, That he would labour my delivery.

Second Messenger: You are sent for to the senate: A fearful army, led by Caius Marcius Associated with Aufidius, rages Upon our territories; and have already O'erborne their way, consumed with fire, and took What lay before them.

YORK: Grandam, his nurse.

LADY ANNE: Vouchsafe, defused infection of a man, For these known evils, but to give me leave, By circumstance, to curse thy cursed self.

GLOUCESTER: Nor none that live, I hope.

KING RICHARD III: Ay, I thank God, my father, and yourself.

GREY: Here come the lords of Buckingham and Derby.

SICINIUS: Peace! We need not put new matter to his charge: What you have seen him do and heard him speak, Beating your officers, cursing yourselves, Opposing laws with strokes and here defying Those whose great power must try him; even this, So criminal and in such capital kind, Deserves the extremest death.

BUCKINGHAM: Madam, we did: he desires to make atonement Betwixt the Duke of Gloucester and your brothers, And betwixt them and my lord chamberlain; And sent to warn them to his royal presence.

MENENIUS: Here come the clusters. And is Aufidius with him? You are they That made the air unwholesome, when you cast Your stinking greasy caps in hooting at Coriolanus' exile. Now he's coming; And not a hair upon a soldier's head Which will not prove a whip: as many coxcombs As you threw caps up will he tumble down, And pay you for your voices. 'Tis no matter; if he could burn us all into one coal, We have deserved it.

First Senator: No more words, we beseech you.

KING EDWARD IV: A pleasing cordial, princely Buckingham, is this thy vow unto my sickly heart. There wanteth now our brother Gloucester here, To make the perfect period of this peace.

First Citizen: We have ever your good word.

CORIOLANUS: Scratches with briers, Scars to move laughter only.

HASTINGS: And so say I.

GLOUCESTER: I know not whether to depart in silence, Or bitterly to speak in your reproof. Best fitteth my degree or your condition If not to answer, you might haply think Tongue-tied ambition, not replying, yielded To bear the golden yoke of sovereignty, Which fondly you would here impose on me; If to reprove you for this suit of yours, So season'd with your faithful love to me. Then, on the other side, I cheque'd my friends. Therefore, to speak, and to avoid the first, And then, in speaking, not to incur the last, Definitively thus I answer you. Your love deserves my thanks; but my desert Unmeritable shuns your high request. First if all obstacles were cut away, And that my path were even to the crown, As my ripe revenue and due by birth Yet so much is my poverty of spirit, So mighty and so many my defects, As I had rather hide me from my greatness, Being a bark to brook no mighty sea, Than in my greatness covet to be hid, And in the vapour of my glory smother'd. But, God be thank'd, there's no need of me, And much I need to help you, if need were; The royal tree hath left us royal fruit, Which, mellow'd by the stealing hours of time, Will well become the seat of majesty, And make, no doubt, us happy by his reign. On him I lay what you would lay on me, The right and fortune of his happy stars; Which God defend that I should wring from him!

Third Citizen: We have been called so of many; not that our heads are some brown, some black, some auburn, some bald, but that our wits are so diversely coloured: and truly I think if all our wits were to issue out of one skull, they would fly east, west, north, south, and their consent of one direct way should be at once to all the points o' the compass.

Second Murderer: You are deceived, your brother Gloucester hates you.

GLOUCESTER: Go, tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return. Simple, plain Clarence! I do love thee so, That I will shortly send thy soul to heaven, If heaven will take the present at our hands. But who comes here? the new-deliver'd Hastings?

Second Citizen: Ay, sir, it is too true; God help the while!

KING RICHARD III: Darest thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?

First Senator: My general cares not for you. Back, I say, go; lest I let forth your half-pint of blood; back,--that's the utmost of your having: back.

SICINIUS: Sir, the people Must have their voices; neither will they bate One jot of ceremony.

DUCHESS OF YORK: Either thou wilt die, by God's just ordinance, Ere from this war thou turn a conqueror, Or I with grief and extreme age shall perish And never look upon thy face again. Therefore take with thee my most heavy curse; Which, in the day of battle, tire thee more Than all the complete armour that thou wear'st! My prayers on the adverse party fight; And there the little souls of Edward's children Whisper the spirits of thine enemies And promise them success and victory. Bloody thou art, bloody will be thy end; Shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend.

First Murderer: Hark! he stirs: shall I strike?

SICINIUS: Therefore lay hold of him; Bear him to the rock Tarpeian, and from thence Into destruction cast him.

Third Citizen: Are you all resolved to give your voices? But that's no matter, the greater part carries it. I say, if he would incline to the people, there was never a worthier man. Here he comes, and in the gown of humility: mark his behavior. We are not to stay all together, but to come by him where he stands, by ones, by twos, and by threes. He's to make his requests by particulars; wherein every one of us has a single honour, in giving him our own voices with our own tongues: therefore follow me, and I direct you how you shall go by him.

BRUTUS: Come: Half all Cominius' honours are to Marcius. Though Marcius earned them not, and all his faults To Marcius shall be honours, though indeed In aught he merit not.

CATESBY: O, make them joyful, grant their lawful suit!

BUCKINGHAM: Hark! a drum.

COMINIUS: 'Tis not a mile; briefly we heard their drums: How couldst thou in a mile confound an hour, And bring thy news so late?

First Citizen: We cannot, sir, we are undone already.

First Citizen: Very well; and could be content to give him good report fort, but that he pays himself with being proud.

MENENIUS: The consul Coriolanus.

AEdile: With old Menenius, and those senators That always favour'd him.

COMINIUS: Though I could wish You were conducted to a gentle bath And balms applied to, you, yet dare I never Deny your asking: take your choice of those That best can aid your action.

CORIOLANUS: Let them puff all about mine ears, present me Death on the wheel or at wild horses' heels, Or pile ten hills on the Tarpeian rock, That the precipitation might down stretch Below the beam of sight, yet will I still Be thus to them.

First Senator: Farewell.

Second Murderer: When he wakes! why, fool, he shall never wake till the judgment-day.

AUFIDIUS: I know thee not: thy name?

GLOUCESTER: My dagger, little cousin? with all my heart.

KING RICHARD III: And came I not at last to comfort you?

GLOUCESTER: Catesby, o'erlook the walls.

LADY ANNE: What is it?

BUCKINGHAM: Who, I, my lord I we know each other's faces, But for our hearts, he knows no more of mine, Than I of yours; Nor I no more of his, than you of mine. Lord Hastings, you and he are near in love.

HASTINGS: Go on before; I'll talk with this good fellow. How now, sirrah! how goes the world with thee?

GLOUCESTER: Her husband, knave: wouldst thou betray me?

MENENIUS: Well, what then?

GLOUCESTER: My noble lords and cousins all, good morrow. I have been long a sleeper; but, I hope, My absence doth neglect no great designs, Which by my presence might have been concluded.

AUFIDIUS: I cannot help it now, Unless, by using means, I lame the foot Of our design. He bears himself more proudlier, Even to my person, than I thought he would When first I did embrace him: yet his nature In that's no changeling; and I must excuse What cannot be amended.

DUCHESS OF YORK: How, my pretty York? I pray thee, let me hear it.

GLOUCESTER: I know so. But, gentle Lady Anne, To leave this keen encounter of our wits, And fall somewhat into a slower method, Is not the causer of the timeless deaths Of these Plantagenets, Henry and Edward, As blameful as the executioner?

GLOUCESTER: Go, Lovel, with all speed to Doctor Shaw; Go thou to Friar Penker; bid them both Meet me within this hour at Baynard's Castle. Now will I in, to take some privy order, To draw the brats of Clarence out of sight; And to give notice, that no manner of person At any time have recourse unto the princes.

LADY ANNE: If I thought that, I tell thee, homicide, These nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks.

CATESBY: It is a reeling world, indeed, my lord; And I believe twill never stand upright Tim Richard wear the garland of the realm.

GLOUCESTER: These eyes could never endure sweet beauty's wreck; You should not blemish it, if I stood by: As all the world is cheered by the sun, So I by that; it is my day, my life.

LADY ANNE: Foul devil, for God's sake, hence, and trouble us not; For thou hast made the happy earth thy hell, Fill'd it with cursing cries and deep exclaims. If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds, Behold this pattern of thy butcheries. O, gentlemen, see, see! dead Henry's wounds Open their congeal'd mouths and bleed afresh! Blush, Blush, thou lump of foul deformity; For 'tis thy presence that exhales this blood From cold and empty veins, where no blood dwells; Thy deed, inhuman and unnatural, Provokes this deluge most unnatural. O God, which this blood madest, revenge his death! O earth, which this blood drink'st revenge his death! Either heaven with lightning strike the murderer dead, Or earth, gape open wide and eat him quick, As thou dost swallow up this good king's blood Which his hell-govern'd arm hath butchered!

CORIOLANUS: Fare ye well: Thou hast years upon thee; and thou art too full Of the wars' surfeits, to go rove with one That's yet unbruised: bring me but out at gate. Come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and My friends of noble touch, when I am forth, Bid me farewell, and smile. I pray you, come. While I remain above the ground, you shall Hear from me still, and never of me aught But what is like me formerly.

First Servingman: He had so; looking as it were--would I were hanged, but I thought there was more in him than I could think.

MENENIUS: Let's be calm.

DUCHESS OF YORK: Art thou so hasty? I have stay'd for thee, God knows, in anguish, pain and agony.

GLOUCESTER: She may, Lord Rivers! why, who knows not so? She may do more, sir, than denying that: She may help you to many fair preferments, And then deny her aiding hand therein, And lay those honours on your high deserts. What may she not? She may, yea, marry, may she--

Messenger: Where's Caius Marcius?

GLOUCESTER: Here. Why dost thou spit at me?

HASTINGS: Ere a fortnight make me elder, I'll send some packing that yet think not on it.

MENENIUS: I'll bring him to you. Let me desire your company: he must come, Or what is worst will follow.

CLARENCE: Because my name is George.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Up to some scaffold, there to lose their heads?

KING RICHARD III: Tut, tut, thou art all ice, thy kindness freezeth: Say, have I thy consent that they shall die?

BISHOP OF ELY: Marry, and will, my lord, with all my heart.

CORIOLANUS: What is this? Your knees to me? to your corrected son? Then let the pebbles on the hungry beach Fillip the stars; then let the mutinous winds Strike the proud cedars 'gainst the fiery sun; Murdering impossibility, to make What cannot be, slight work.

First Citizen: He's one honest enough: would all the rest were so!

MENENIUS: Come, come, peace.

MENENIUS: Now the good gods forbid That our renowned Rome, whose gratitude Towards her deserved children is enroll'd In Jove's own book, like an unnatural dam Should now eat up her own!

First Citizen: You are all resolved rather to die than to famish?

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Flatter my sorrows with report of it; Tell me what state, what dignity, what honour, Canst thou demise to any child of mine?

First Citizen: The price is to ask it kindly.

MENENIUS: Well, no more.

Second Officer: Three, they say: but 'tis thought of every one Coriolanus will carry it.

Second Citizen: What he cannot help in his nature, you account a vice in him. You must in no way say he is covetous. Visit our archive for more classic works.

DUCHESS OF YORK: Oh, that deceit should steal such gentle shapes, And with a virtuous vizard hide foul guile! He is my son; yea, and therein my shame; Yet from my dugs he drew not this deceit.

MENENIUS: For one poor grain or two! I am one of those; his mother, wife, his child, And this brave fellow too, we are the grains: You are the musty chaff; and you are smelt Above the moon: we must be burnt for you.

HASTINGS: Cannot thy master sleep these tedious nights?

SICINIUS: Mark you this, people?

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the matter. The king, of his own royal disposition, And not provoked by any suitor else; Aiming, belike, at your interior hatred, Which in your outward actions shows itself Against my kindred, brothers, and myself, Makes him to send; that thereby he may gather The ground of your ill-will, and so remove it.

QUEEN MARGARET: Foul shame upon you! you have all moved mine.

MENENIUS: On both sides more respect.

LADY ANNE: Their aunt I am in law, in love their mother: Then bring me to their sights; I'll bear thy blame And take thy office from thee, on my peril.

DUCHESS OF YORK: God bless thee; and put meekness in thy mind, Love, charity, obedience, and true duty!

BUCKINGHAM: Upon record, my gracious lord.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: All seeing heaven, what a world is this!

VOLUMNIA: She shall, she shall.

Lord Mayor: Do, good my lord, your citizens entreat you.

QUEEN MARGARET: A little joy enjoys the queen thereof; For I am she, and altogether joyless. I can no longer hold me patient. Hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out In sharing that which you have pill'd from me! Which of you trembles not that looks on me? If not, that, I being queen, you bow like subjects, Yet that, by you deposed, you quake like rebels? O gentle villain, do not turn away!

HASTINGS: O, 'twas the foulest deed to slay that babe, And the most merciless that e'er was heard of!

ARCHBISHOP OF YORK: My gracious lady, go; And thither bear your treasure and your goods. For my part, I'll resign unto your grace The seal I keep: and so betide to me As well I tender you and all of yours! Come, I'll conduct you to the sanctuary.

First Servingman: What would you have, friend? whence are you? Here's no place for you: pray, go to the door.

Third Citizen: Neighbours, God speed!

GLOUCESTER: So will it, madam till I lie with you.

BRUTUS: Merely awry: when he did love his country, It honour'd him.

COMINIUS: You have fought together.

COMINIUS: On, to the Capitol!

A Patrician: Ay, and burn too.

AUFIDIUS: You keep a constant temper.

GLOUCESTER: Would you enforce me to a world of care? Well, call them again. I am not made of stone, But penetrable to your. kind entreats, Albeit against my conscience and my soul. Cousin of Buckingham, and you sage, grave men, Since you will buckle fortune on my back, To bear her burthen, whether I will or no, I must have patience to endure the load: But if black scandal or foul-faced reproach Attend the sequel of your imposition, Your mere enforcement shall acquittance me From all the impure blots and stains thereof; For God he knows, and you may partly see, How far I am from the desire thereof.

Third Citizen: How not your own desire?

SICINIUS: Is't possible that so short a time can alter the condition of a man!

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Ay me, I see the downfall of our house! The tiger now hath seized the gentle hind; Insulting tyranny begins to jet Upon the innocent and aweless throne: Welcome, destruction, death, and massacre! I see, as in a map, the end of all.

Roman: Banished, sir.

First Citizen: I the great toe! why the great toe?

CORIOLANUS: Ay, as an ostler, that for the poorest piece Will bear the knave by the volume. The honour'd gods Keep Rome in safety, and the chairs of justice Supplied with worthy men! plant love among 's! Throng our large temples with the shows of peace, And not our streets with war!

LARTIUS: I shall, my lord.

SICINIUS: Bid them all home; he's gone, and we'll no further. The nobility are vex'd, whom we see have sided In his behalf.

VOLUMNIA: O, ye're well met: the hoarded plague o' the gods Requite your love!

CORIOLANUS: I beseech you, peace: Or, if you'ld ask, remember this before: The thing I have forsworn to grant may never Be held by you denials. Do not bid me Dismiss my soldiers, or capitulate Again with Rome's mechanics: tell me not Wherein I seem unnatural: desire not To ally my rages and revenges with Your colder reasons.

BISHOP OF ELY: Your grace, we think, should soonest know his mind.

CLARENCE: Methoughts that I had broken from the Tower, And was embark'd to cross to Burgundy; And, in my company, my brother Gloucester; Who from my cabin tempted me to walk Upon the hatches: thence we looked toward England, And cited up a thousand fearful times, During the wars of York and Lancaster That had befall'n us. As we paced along Upon the giddy footing of the hatches, Methought that Gloucester stumbled; and, in falling, Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard, Into the tumbling billows of the main. Lord, Lord! methought, what pain it was to drown! What dreadful noise of waters in mine ears! What ugly sights of death within mine eyes! Methought I saw a thousand fearful wrecks; Ten thousand men that fishes gnaw'd upon; Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl, Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels, All scatter'd in the bottom of the sea: Some lay in dead men's skulls; and, in those holes Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept, As 'twere in scorn of eyes, reflecting gems, Which woo'd the slimy bottom of the deep, And mock'd the dead bones that lay scatter'd by.

MENENIUS: Pray now, your news? You have made fair work, I fear me.--Pray, your news?-- If Marcius should be join'd with Volscians,--

COMINIUS: Let me speak: I have been consul, and can show for Rome Her enemies' marks upon me. I do love My country's good with a respect more tender, More holy and profound, than mine own life, My dear wife's estimate, her womb's increase, And treasure of my loins; then if I would Speak that,--

MENENIUS: How! Was it we? we loved him but, like beasts And cowardly nobles, gave way unto your clusters, Who did hoot him out o' the city.

Citizens: No, no, no, no, no.

GLOUCESTER: No, to White-Friars; there attend my coining. Was ever woman in this humour woo'd? Was ever woman in this humour won? I'll have her; but I will not keep her long. What! I, that kill'd her husband and his father, To take her in her heart's extremest hate, With curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes, The bleeding witness of her hatred by; Having God, her conscience, and these bars against me, And I nothing to back my suit at all, But the plain devil and dissembling looks, And yet to win her, all the world to nothing! Ha! Hath she forgot already that brave prince, Edward, her lord, whom I, some three months since, Stabb'd in my angry mood at Tewksbury? A sweeter and a lovelier gentleman, Framed in the prodigality of nature, Young, valiant, wise, and, no doubt, right royal, The spacious world cannot again afford And will she yet debase her eyes on me, That cropp'd the golden prime of this sweet prince, And made her widow to a woful bed? On me, whose all not equals Edward's moiety? On me, that halt and am unshapen thus? My dukedom to a beggarly denier, I do mistake my person all this while: Upon my life, she finds, although I cannot, Myself to be a marvellous proper man. I'll be at charges for a looking-glass, And entertain some score or two of tailors, To study fashions to adorn my body: Since I am crept in favour with myself, Will maintain it with some little cost. But first I'll turn yon fellow in his grave; And then return lamenting to my love. Shine out, fair sun, till I have bought a glass, That I may see my shadow as I pass.

DERBY: I pray God he be not, I say.

LADY ANNE: No! why? When he that is my husband now Came to me, as I follow'd Henry's corse, When scarce the blood was well wash'd from his hands Which issued from my other angel husband And that dead saint which then I weeping follow'd; O, when, I say, I look'd on Richard's face, This was my wish: 'Be thou,' quoth I, ' accursed, For making me, so young, so old a widow! And, when thou wed'st, let sorrow haunt thy bed; And be thy wife--if any be so mad-- As miserable by the life of thee As thou hast made me by my dear lord's death! Lo, ere I can repeat this curse again, Even in so short a space, my woman's heart Grossly grew captive to his honey words And proved the subject of my own soul's curse, Which ever since hath kept my eyes from rest; For never yet one hour in his bed Have I enjoy'd the golden dew of sleep, But have been waked by his timorous dreams. Besides, he hates me for my father Warwick; And will, no doubt, shortly be rid of me.

SICINIUS: Have you Ere now denied the asker? and now again Of him that did not ask, but mock, bestow Your sued-for tongues?

CORIOLANUS: No, I'll die here. There's some among you have beheld me fighting: Come, try upon yourselves what you have seen me.

QUEEN MARGARET: Bear with me; I am hungry for revenge, And now I cloy me with beholding it. Thy Edward he is dead, that stabb'd my Edward: Thy other Edward dead, to quit my Edward; Young York he is but boot, because both they Match not the high perfection of my loss: Thy Clarence he is dead that kill'd my Edward; And the beholders of this tragic play, The adulterate Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey, Untimely smother'd in their dusky graves. Richard yet lives, hell's black intelligencer, Only reserved their factor, to buy souls And send them thither: but at hand, at hand, Ensues his piteous and unpitied end: Earth gapes, hell burns, fiends roar, saints pray. To have him suddenly convey'd away. Cancel his bond of life, dear God, I prey, That I may live to say, The dog is dead!

MENENIUS: Fie, fie, fie! This is the way to kindle, not to quench.

MENENIUS: Sham it be put to that?

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Wilt thou, O God, fly from such gentle lambs, And throw them in the entrails of the wolf? When didst thou sleep when such a deed was done?

MENENIUS: Put them not to't: Pray you, go fit you to the custom and Take to you, as your predecessors have, Your honour with your form.

SICINIUS: Pray, let us go.

PRINCE EDWARD: Welcome, my lord: what, will our mother come?

First Soldier: I shall, sir.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: My words are dull; O, quicken them with thine!

GLOUCESTER: Lady, you know no rules of charity, Which renders good for bad, blessings for curses. Visit our archive for more classic works.

MENENIUS: Our very priests must become mockers, if they shall encounter such ridiculous subjects as you are. When you speak best unto the purpose, it is not worth the wagging of your beards; and your beards deserve not so honourable a grave as to stuff a botcher's cushion, or to be entombed in an ass's pack- saddle. Yet you must be saying, Marcius is proud; who in a cheap estimation, is worth predecessors since Deucalion, though peradventure some of the best of 'em were hereditary hangmen. God-den to your worships: more of your conversation would infect my brain, being the herdsmen of the beastly plebeians: I will be bold to take my leave of you. How now, my as fair as noble ladies,--and the moon, were she earthly, no nobler,--whither do you follow your eyes so fast?

Third Citizen: Better it were they all came by the father, Or by the father there were none at all; For emulation now, who shall be nearest, Will touch us all too near, if God prevent not. O, full of danger is the Duke of Gloucester! And the queen's sons and brothers haught and proud: And were they to be ruled, and not to rule, This sickly land might solace as before.

YORK: Now, by my troth, if I had been remember'd, I could have given my uncle's grace a flout, To touch his growth nearer than he touch'd mine.

Volsce: Nicanor? no.

GLOUCESTER: Then bid me kill myself, and I will do it.

BUCKINGHAM: With what a sharp-provided wit he reasons! To mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle, He prettily and aptly taunts himself: So cunning and so young is wonderful.

First Murderer: Do so, it is a point of wisdom: fare you well.

Third Citizen: And so was I: I'll bear you company.

Both: Why, how are we censured?

MENENIUS: For 'tis a sore upon us, You cannot tent yourself: be gone, beseech you.

Third Servingman: What have you to do here, fellow? Pray you, avoid the house.

SICINIUS: You are at point to lose your liberties: Marcius would have all from you; Marcius, Whom late you have named for consul.

Second Messenger: Sir, we have all Great cause to give great thanks.

BRUTUS: We stay here for the people.

Second Servingman: 'Tis so: and as war, in some sort, may be said to be a ravisher, so it cannot be denied but peace is a great maker of cuckolds.

GLOUCESTER: And to that end we wish'd your lord-ship here, To avoid the carping censures of the world.

Messenger: Lord Rivers and Lord Grey are sent to Pomfret, With them Sir Thomas Vaughan, prisoners.

BRUTUS: Which the rather We shall be blest to do, if he remember A kinder value of the people than He hath hereto prized them at.

MARCIUS: Hang 'em! They say! They'll sit by the fire, and presume to know What's done i' the Capitol; who's like to rise, Who thrives and who declines; side factions and give out Conjectural marriages; making parties strong And feebling such as stand not in their liking Below their cobbled shoes. They say there's grain enough! Would the nobility lay aside their ruth, And let me use my sword, I'll make a quarry With thousands of these quarter'd slaves, as high As I could pick my lance.

GLOUCESTER: Why, this it is, when men are ruled by women: 'Tis not the king that sends you to the Tower: My Lady Grey his wife, Clarence, 'tis she That tempers him to this extremity. Was it not she and that good man of worship, Anthony Woodville, her brother there, That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower, From whence this present day he is deliver'd? We are not safe, Clarence; we are not safe.

First Citizen: I twice five hundred and their friends to piece 'em.

BUCKINGHAM: Is it even so? rewards he my true service With such deep contempt made I him king for this? O, let me think on Hastings, and be gone To Brecknock, while my fearful head is on!

DUCHESS OF YORK: No, boy.

MENENIUS: Prithee, fellow, remember my name is Menenius, always factionary on the party of your general.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: To save her life, I'll say she is not so.

MENENIUS: Ay, but mildly.

CATESBY: Ay, on my life; and hopes to find forward Upon his party for the gain thereof: And thereupon he sends you this good news, That this same very day your enemies, The kindred of the queen, must die at Pomfret.

First Officer: That's a brave fellow; but he's vengeance proud, and loves not the common people.

MENENIUS: What is about to be? I am out of breath; Confusion's near; I cannot speak. You, tribunes To the people! Coriolanus, patience! Speak, good Sicinius.

LADY ANNE: No more than from my soul I mourn for yours.

CLARENCE: Oh, if you love my brother, hate not me; I am his brother, and I love him well. If you be hired for meed, go back again, And I will send you to my brother Gloucester, Who shall reward you better for my life Than Edward will for tidings of my death.

BRUTUS: But is this true, sir?

MENENIUS: You have made good work, You and your apron-men; you that stood so up much on the voice of occupation and The breath of garlic-eaters!

MARCIUS: Were half to half the world by the ears and he. Upon my party, I'ld revolt to make Only my wars with him: he is a lion That I am proud to hunt.

Second Murderer: Not to kill him, having a warrant for it; but to be damned for killing him, from which no warrant can defend us.

PRINCE EDWARD: An if they live, I hope I need not fear. But come, my lord; and with a heavy heart, Thinking on them, go I unto the Tower.

MENENIUS: Well, well, no more of that.

BRUTUS: Let's to the Capitol. Would half my wealth Would buy this for a lie!

CORIOLANUS: Traitor! how now!

BUCKINGHAM: I do, my lord; but long I shall not stay I shall return before your lordship thence.

Second Soldier: Nor I.

Second Servingman: Are you so brave? I'll have you talked with anon.

Second Servingman: Worth six on him.

Second Citizen: We may, sir, if we will.

MENENIUS: The augurer tells me we shall have news to-night.

BUCKINGHAM: Your grace may do your pleasure.

VIRGILIA: The sorrow that delivers us thus changed Makes you think so.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: What stay had I but Edward? and he's gone.

TYRREL: If to have done the thing you gave in charge Beget your happiness, be happy then, For it is done, my lord.

Messenger: Spies of the Volsces Held me in chase, that I was forced to wheel Three or four miles about, else had I, sir, Half an hour since brought my report.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: You have no cause.

All: Welcome, ladies, Welcome!

Boy: Grandam, we can; for my good uncle Gloucester Told me, the king, provoked by the queen, Devised impeachments to imprison him : And when my uncle told me so, he wept, And hugg'd me in his arm, and kindly kiss'd my cheek; Bade me rely on him as on my father, And he would love me dearly as his child.

KING RICHARD III: Tut, tut, Thou troublest me; am not in the vein.

CORIOLANUS: Kindly! Sir, I pray, let me ha't: I have wounds to show you, which shall be yours in private. Your good voice, sir; what say you?

HASTINGS: What is't o'clock?

STANLEY: My lord, good morrow; good morrow, Catesby: You may jest on, but, by the holy rood, I do not like these several councils, I.

BUCKINGHAM: True, noble prince.

BUCKINGHAM: My lord!

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Was never widow had so dear a loss!

HASTINGS: More pity that the eagle should be mew'd, While kites and buzzards prey at liberty. Visit our archive for more classic works.

Second Servingman: And I shall.

BUCKINGHAM: Had not you come upon your cue, my lord William Lord Hastings had pronounced your part,-- I mean, your voice,--for crowning of the king.

All: No more talking on't; let it be done: away, away!

MENENIUS: I paint him in the character. Mark what mercy his mother shall bring from him: there is no more mercy in him than there is milk in a male tiger; that shall our poor city find: and all this is long of you.

Second Roman: And I this.

BUCKINGHAM: And, in good time, here comes the sweating lord.

GLOUCESTER: Now is the winter of our discontent Made glorious summer by this sun of York; And all the clouds that lour'd upon our house In the deep bosom of the ocean buried. Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths; Our bruised arms hung up for monuments; Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings, Our dreadful marches to delightful measures. Grim-visaged war hath smooth'd his wrinkled front; And now, instead of mounting barded steeds To fright the souls of fearful adversaries, He capers nimbly in a lady's chamber To the lascivious pleasing of a lute. But I, that am not shaped for sportive tricks, Nor made to court an amorous looking-glass; I, that am rudely stamp'd, and want love's majesty To strut before a wanton ambling nymph; I, that am curtail'd of this fair proportion, Cheated of feature by dissembling nature, Deformed, unfinish'd, sent before my time Into this breathing world, scarce half made up, And that so lamely and unfashionable That dogs bark at me as I halt by them; Why, I, in this weak piping time of peace, Have no delight to pass away the time, Unless to spy my shadow in the sun And descant on mine own deformity: And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover, To entertain these fair well-spoken days, I am determined to prove a villain And hate the idle pleasures of these days. Plots have I laid, inductions dangerous, By drunken prophecies, libels and dreams, To set my brother Clarence and the king In deadly hate the one against the other: And if King Edward be as true and just As I am subtle, false and treacherous, This day should Clarence closely be mew'd up, About a prophecy, which says that 'G' Of Edward's heirs the murderer shall be. Dive, thoughts, down to my soul: here Clarence comes. Brother, good day; what means this armed guard That waits upon your grace?

CORIOLANUS: O, You have, I know, petition'd all the gods For my prosperity!

Both Tribunes: Farewell, farewell.

Second Citizen: Worthy Menenius Agrippa; one that hath always loved the people.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: A holy day shall this be kept hereafter: I would to God all strifes were well compounded. My sovereign liege, I do beseech your majesty To take our brother Clarence to your grace.

A Patrician: This man has marr'd his fortune.

HASTINGS: I thank his grace, I know he loves me well; But, for his purpose in the coronation. I have not sounded him, nor he deliver'd His gracious pleasure any way therein: But you, my noble lords, may name the time; And in the duke's behalf I'll give my voice, Which, I presume, he'll take in gentle part.

Second Messenger: Almost at point to enter.

MENENIUS: I tell you, friends, most charitable care Have the patricians of you. For your wants, Your suffering in this dearth, you may as well Strike at the heaven with your staves as lift them Against the Roman state, whose course will on The way it takes, cracking ten thousand curbs Of more strong link asunder than can ever Appear in your impediment. For the dearth, The gods, not the patricians, make it, and Your knees to them, not arms, must help. Alack, You are transported by calamity Thither where more attends you, and you slander The helms o' the state, who care for you like fathers, When you curse them as enemies.

BUCKINGHAM: Nothing that I respect, my gracious lord.

VOLUMNIA: Look, here's a letter from him: the state hath another, his wife another; and, I think, there's one at home for you.

MARCIUS: Thanks. What's the matter, you dissentious rogues, That, rubbing the poor itch of your opinion, Make yourselves scabs?

MENENIUS: No, I'll not meddle.

GLOUCESTER: I grant ye.

MENENIUS: Note me this, good friend; Your most grave belly was deliberate, Not rash like his accusers, and thus answer'd: 'True is it, my incorporate friends,' quoth he, 'That I receive the general food at first, Which you do live upon; and fit it is, Because I am the store-house and the shop Of the whole body: but, if you do remember, I send it through the rivers of your blood, Even to the court, the heart, to the seat o' the brain; And, through the cranks and offices of man, The strongest nerves and small inferior veins From me receive that natural competency Whereby they live: and though that all at once, You, my good friends,'--this says the belly, mark me,--

First Servingman: Here's a strange alteration!

CORIOLANUS: Think upon me! hang 'em! I would they would forget me, like the virtues Which our divines lose by 'em.

Gentlewoman: Madam, the Lady Valeria is come to visit you.

GLOUCESTER: Look to the drawbridge there!

SICINIUS: We charge you, that you have contrived to take From Rome all season'd office and to wind Yourself into a power tyrannical; For which you are a traitor to the people.

CLARENCE: To murder me?

HASTINGS: Indeed, I am no mourner for that news, Because they have been still mine enemies: But, that I'll give my voice on Richard's side, To bar my master's heirs in true descent, God knows I will not do it, to the death.

MENENIUS: You'll mar all: I'll leave you: pray you, speak to 'em, I pray you, In wholesome manner.

Second Citizen: Your own desert!

MENENIUS: Wondrous! ay, I warrant you, and not without his true purchasing.

Second Senator: What cause, do you think, I have to swoon?

Messenger: Such news, my lord, as grieves me to unfold.

Third Citizen: You must think, if we give you any thing, we hope to gain by you.

Citizens: Our enemy is banish'd! he is gone! Hoo! hoo!

MENENIUS: I am, as thy general is.

First Senator: Noble tribunes, It is the humane way: the other course Will prove too bloody, and the end of it Unknown to the beginning.

GLOUCESTER: O, do not swear, my lord of Buckingham.

MENENIUS: Not according to the prayer of the people, for they love not Marcius.

Second Senator: Noble Aufidius, Take your commission; hie you to your bands: Let us alone to guard Corioli: If they set down before 's, for the remove Bring your army; but, I think, you'll find They've not prepared for us.

BRUTUS: AEdiles, seize him!

SICINIUS: God-den, our neighbours.

MENENIUS: Not now, not now.

Second Conspirator: And patient fools, Whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear With giving him glory.

MENENIUS: Pray now, sit down.

Third Servingman: A marvellous poor one.

QUEEN MARGARET: I was; but I do find more pain in banishment Than death can yield me here by my abode. A husband and a son thou owest to me; And thou a kingdom; all of you allegiance: The sorrow that I have, by right is yours, And all the pleasures you usurp are mine.

AEdile: Worthy tribunes, There is a slave, whom we have put in prison, Reports, the Volsces with two several powers Are enter'd in the Roman territories, And with the deepest malice of the war Destroy what lies before 'em.

RIVERS: Who knows not he is dead! who knows he is?

SICINIUS: What's the news?

First Murderer: And, like a traitor to the name of God, Didst break that vow; and with thy treacherous blade Unrip'dst the bowels of thy sovereign's son.

AUFIDIUS: What is thy name?

BRUTUS: Caius Marcius was A worthy officer i' the war; but insolent, O'ercome with pride, ambitious past all thinking, Self-loving,--

First Senator: Not in this heat, sir, now. Visit our archive for more classic works.

DUCHESS OF YORK: No, by the holy rood, thou know'st it well, Thou camest on earth to make the earth my hell. A grievous burthen was thy birth to me; Tetchy and wayward was thy infancy; Thy school-days frightful, desperate, wild, and furious, Thy prime of manhood daring, bold, and venturous, Thy age confirm'd, proud, subdued, bloody, treacherous, More mild, but yet more harmful, kind in hatred: What comfortable hour canst thou name, That ever graced me in thy company?

MENENIUS: Nay, but, fellow, fellow,--

QUEEN MARGARET: O princely Buckingham I'll kiss thy hand, In sign of league and amity with thee: Now fair befal thee and thy noble house! Thy garments are not spotted with our blood, Nor thou within the compass of my curse.

COMINIUS: He would not seem to know me.

CORIOLANUS: Why force you this?

GLOUCESTER: If you thrive well, bring them to Baynard's Castle; Where you shall find me well accompanied With reverend fathers and well-learned bishops.

BRUTUS: In that there's comfort. Visit our archive for more classic works.

First Citizen: So stood the state when Henry the Sixth Was crown'd in Paris but at nine months old. Visit our archive for more classic works.

COMINIUS: Noble Marcius!

GLOUCESTER: Why, madam, have I offer'd love for this To be so bouted in this royal presence? Who knows not that the noble duke is dead? You do him injury to scorn his corse.

LADY ANNE: Despiteful tidings! O unpleasing news!

Roman: I am joyful to hear of their readiness, and am the man, I think, that shall set them in present action. So, sir, heartily well met, and most glad of your company.

Page: My lord, I know a discontented gentleman, Whose humble means match not his haughty mind: Gold were as good as twenty orators, And will, no doubt, tempt him to any thing.

DUCHESS OF YORK: My pretty cousins, you mistake me much; I do lament the sickness of the king. As loath to lose him, not your father's death; It were lost sorrow to wail one that's lost.

Roman: Well, let us go together.

First Senator: The gods forbid! I prithee, noble friend, home to thy house; Leave us to cure this cause.

CORIOLANUS: Marcius!

Second Murderer: 'Faith, some certain dregs of conscience are yet within me.

DUCHESS OF YORK: I long with all my heart to see the prince: I hope he is much grown since last I saw him.

LARTIUS: So, the good horse is mine.

QUEEN MARGARET: And turns the sun to shade; alas! alas! Witness my son, now in the shade of death; Whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath Hath in eternal darkness folded up. Your aery buildeth in our aery's nest. O God, that seest it, do not suffer it! As it was won with blood, lost be it so!

KING RICHARD III: Faith, none, but Humphrey Hour, that call'd your grace To breakfast once forth of my company. If I be so disgracious in your sight, Let me march on, and not offend your grace. Strike the drum.

BUCKINGHAM: Upon the stroke of ten.

Second Murderer: Let it go; there's few or none will entertain it.

MENENIUS: O sir, you are not right: have you not known The worthiest men have done't?

BRUTUS: And when such time they have begun to cry, Let them not cease, but with a din confused Enforce the present execution Of what we chance to sentence.

First Murderer: So do not I: go, coward as thou art. Now must I hide his body in some hole, Until the duke take order for his burial: And when I have my meed, I must away; For this will out, and here I must not stay.

SICINIUS: Here's he that would take from you all your power.

MENENIUS: Down with that sword! Tribunes, withdraw awhile.

BUCKINGHAM: Return, good Catesby, to thy lord again; Tell him, myself, the mayor and citizens, In deep designs and matters of great moment, No less importing than our general good, Are come to have some conference with his grace.

BRUTUS: Let them go on; This mutiny were better put in hazard, Than stay, past doubt, for greater: If, as his nature is, he fall in rage With their refusal, both observe and answer The vantage of his anger.

COMINIUS: O, well begg'd! Were he the butcher of my son, he should Be free as is the wind. Deliver him, Titus.

AEdile: I have; 'tis ready.

MENENIUS: What then? 'Fore me, this fellow speaks! What then? what then?

GLOUCESTER: Commend me to Lord William: tell him, Catesby, His ancient knot of dangerous adversaries To-morrow are let blood at Pomfret-castle; And bid my friend, for joy of this good news, Give mistress Shore one gentle kiss the more.

VALERIA: Not out of doors!

Third Servingman: Do't! he will do't; for, look you, sir, he has as many friends as enemies; which friends, sir, as it were, durst not, look you, sir, show themselves, as we term it, his friends whilst he's in directitude.

First Senator: From whence?

AUFIDIUS: Ay, traitor, Marcius!

MARCIUS: Pray now, no more: my mother, Who has a charter to extol her blood, When she does praise me grieves me. I have done As you have done; that's what I can; induced As you have been; that's for my country: He that has but effected his good will Hath overta'en mine act.

MARCIUS: I am glad on 't: then we shall ha' means to vent Our musty superfluity. See, our best elders.

Both Citizens: The gods give you joy, sir, heartily!

PRINCE EDWARD: A beggar, brother?

LADY ANNE: O wonderful, when devils tell the truth!

First Servingman: Nay, not so neither: but I take him to be the greater soldier.

First Senator: Do you hear how we are shent for keeping your greatness back? Visit our archive for more classic works.

BRUTUS: Now we have shown our power, Let us seem humbler after it is done Than when it was a-doing.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: And only in that safety died her brothers.

LADY ANNE: God give your graces both A happy and a joyful time of day!