SICINIUS: Go, see him out at gates, and follow him, As he hath followed you, with all despite; Give him deserved vexation. Let a guard Attend us through the city.

CORIOLANUS: No, sir,'twas never my desire yet to trouble the poor with begging.

MENENIUS: No, in such a case the gods will not be good unto us. When we banished him, we respected not them; and, he returning to break our necks, they respect not us.

ARCHBISHOP OF YORK: Here comes a messenger. What news?

PRINCE EDWARD: But say, my lord, it were not register'd, Methinks the truth should live from age to age, As 'twere retail'd to all posterity, Even to the general all-ending day.

Messenger: Sir, if you'ld save your life, fly to your house: The plebeians have got your fellow-tribune And hale him up and down, all swearing, if The Roman ladies bring not comfort home, They'll give him death by inches.

Citizens: Let's hear our tribune: peace Speak, speak, speak. Visit our archive for more classic works.

BRUTUS: Most willingly; But yet my caution was more pertinent Than the rebuke you give it.

CORIOLANUS: I am content.

GLOUCESTER: If I thou protector of this damned strumpet-- Tellest thou me of 'ifs'? Thou art a traitor: Off with his head! Now, by Saint Paul I swear, I will not dine until I see the same. Lovel and Ratcliff, look that it be done: The rest, that love me, rise and follow me.

PRINCE EDWARD: Ay, brother, to our grief, as it is yours: Too late he died that might have kept that title, Which by his death hath lost much majesty.

VOLUMNIA: If it be honour in your wars to seem The same you are not, which, for your best ends, You adopt your policy, how is it less or worse, That it shall hold companionship in peace With honour, as in war, since that to both It stands in like request?

QUEEN ELIZABETH: How canst thou woo her?

First Soldier: See, they have shut him in.

All The Lords: You are most welcome home.

PRINCE EDWARD: That Julius Caesar was a famous man; With what his valour did enrich his wit, His wit set down to make his valour live Death makes no conquest of this conqueror; For now he lives in fame, though not in life. I'll tell you what, my cousin Buckingham,--

QUEEN MARGARET: Forbear to sleep the nights, and fast the days; Compare dead happiness with living woe; Think that thy babes were fairer than they were, And he that slew them fouler than he is: Bettering thy loss makes the bad causer worse: Revolving this will teach thee how to curse.

MARCIUS: I have some wounds upon me, and they smart To hear themselves remember'd.

MENENIUS: Cannot be! We have record that very well it can, And three examples of the like have been Within my age. But reason with the fellow, Before you punish him, where he heard this, Lest you shall chance to whip your information And beat the messenger who bids beware Of what is to be dreaded.

COMINIUS: Though thou speak'st truth, Methinks thou speak'st not well. How long is't since?

GLOUCESTER: Come, cousin, canst thou quake, and change thy colour, Murder thy breath in the middle of a word, And then begin again, and stop again, As if thou wert distraught and mad with terror?

Both: Ay, so we will.

Lieutenant: I do not know what witchcraft's in him, but Your soldiers use him as the grace 'fore meat, Their talk at table, and their thanks at end; And you are darken'd in this action, sir, Even by your own.

BUCKINGHAM: Welcome, sweet prince, to London, to your chamber.

CORIOLANUS: I had rather have one scratch my head i' the sun When the alarum were struck than idly sit To hear my nothings monster'd.

MENENIUS: 'Though all at once cannot See what I do deliver out to each, Yet I can make my audit up, that all From me do back receive the flour of all, And leave me but the bran.' What say you to't?

AUFIDIUS: Therefore, most absolute sir, if thou wilt have The leading of thine own revenges, take The one half of my commission; and set down-- As best thou art experienced, since thou know'st Thy country's strength and weakness,--thine own ways; Whether to knock against the gates of Rome, Or rudely visit them in parts remote, To fright them, ere destroy. But come in: Let me commend thee first to those that shall Say yea to thy desires. A thousand welcomes! And more a friend than e'er an enemy; Yet, Marcius, that was much. Your hand: most welcome!

KING RICHARD III: Even all I have; yea, and myself and all, Will I withal endow a child of thine; So in the Lethe of thy angry soul Thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs Which thou supposest I have done to thee.

Second Servingman: And he's as like to do't as any man I can imagine.

BUCKINGHAM: Have done, have done.

CORIOLANUS: You bless me, gods!

GLOUCESTER: Your bed-chamber.

First Citizen: Ourselves, our wives, and children, on our knees, Are bound to pray for you both.

AUFIDIUS: Where is this fellow?

GLOUCESTER: Sweet prince, the untainted virtue of your years Hath not yet dived into the world's deceit Nor more can you distinguish of a man Than of his outward show; which, God he knows, Seldom or never jumpeth with the heart. Those uncles which you want were dangerous; Your grace attended to their sugar'd words, But look'd not on the poison of their hearts : God keep you from them, and from such false friends!

First Soldier: Fool-hardiness; not I.

MENENIUS: I will tell you If you'll bestow a small--of what you have little-- Patience awhile, you'll hear the belly's answer.

BRUTUS: Go see this rumourer whipp'd. It cannot be The Volsces dare break with us.

SICINIUS: Besides, if things go well, Opinion that so sticks on Marcius shall Of his demerits rob Cominius.

SICINIUS: The very trick on't. Visit our archive for more classic works.

Second Murderer: In the Duke of Gloucester's purse.

GLOUCESTER: Unmanner'd dog! stand thou, when I command: Advance thy halbert higher than my breast, Or, by Saint Paul, I'll strike thee to my foot, And spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness.

VOLUMNIA: Should we be silent and not speak, our raiment And state of bodies would bewray what life We have led since thy exile. Think with thyself How more unfortunate than all living women Are we come hither: since that thy sight, which should Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance with comforts, Constrains them weep and shake with fear and sorrow; Making the mother, wife and child to see The son, the husband and the father tearing His country's bowels out. And to poor we Thine enmity's most capital: thou barr'st us Our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort That all but we enjoy; for how can we, Alas, how can we for our country pray. Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory, Whereto we are bound? alack, or we must lose The country, our dear nurse, or else thy person, Our comfort in the country. We must find An evident calamity, though we had Our wish, which side should win: for either thou Must, as a foreign recreant, be led With manacles thorough our streets, or else triumphantly tread on thy country's ruin, And bear the palm for having bravely shed Thy wife and children's blood. For myself, son, I purpose not to wait on fortune till These wars determine: if I cannot persuade thee Rather to show a noble grace to both parts Than seek the end of one, thou shalt no sooner March to assault thy country than to tread-- Trust to't, thou shalt not--on thy mother's womb, That brought thee to this world.

KING RICHARD III: You speak as if that I had slain my cousins.

CORIOLANUS: Cut me to pieces, Volsces; men and lads, Stain all your edges on me. Boy! false hound! If you have writ your annals true, 'tis there, That, like an eagle in a dove-cote, I Flutter'd your Volscians in Corioli: Alone I did it. Boy!

AUFIDIUS: Ay, Marcius, Caius Marcius: dost thou think I'll grace thee with that robbery, thy stol'n name Coriolanus in Corioli? You lords and heads o' the state, perfidiously He has betray'd your business, and given up, For certain drops of salt, your city Rome, I say 'your city,' to his wife and mother; Breaking his oath and resolution like A twist of rotten silk, never admitting Counsel o' the war, but at his nurse's tears He whined and roar'd away your victory, That pages blush'd at him and men of heart Look'd wondering each at other. Visit our archive for more classic works.

MENENIUS: I am known to be a humorous patrician, and one that loves a cup of hot wine with not a drop of allaying Tiber in't; said to be something imperfect in favouring the first complaint; hasty and tinder-like upon too trivial motion; one that converses more with the buttock of the night than with the forehead of the morning: what I think I utter, and spend my malice in my breath. Meeting two such wealsmen as you are--I cannot call you Lycurguses--if the drink you give me touch my palate adversely, I make a crooked face at it. I can't say your worships have delivered the matter well, when I find the ass in compound with the major part of your syllables: and though I must be content to bear with those that say you are reverend grave men, yet they lie deadly that tell you you have good faces. If you see this in the map of my microcosm, follows it that I am known well enough too? what barm can your bisson conspectuities glean out of this character, if I be known well enough too?

VOLUMNIA: Your knee, sirrah.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: But I hear, no; they say my son of York Hath almost overta'en him in his growth.

TYRREL: Ay, my lord; But I had rather kill two enemies.

KING RICHARD III: Art thou, indeed?

SICINIUS: Has spoken like a traitor, and shall answer As traitors do.

BRAKENBURY: In God's name what are you, and how came you hither?

CORIOLANUS: Wife, mother, child, I know not. My affairs Are servanted to others: though I owe My revenge properly, my remission lies In Volscian breasts. That we have been familiar, Ingrate forgetfulness shall poison, rather Than pity note how much. Therefore, be gone. Mine ears against your suits are stronger than Your gates against my force. Yet, for I loved thee, Take this along; I writ it for thy sake And would have rent it. Another word, Menenius, I will not hear thee speak. This man, Aufidius, Was my beloved in Rome: yet thou behold'st!

DERBY: What of his heart perceive you in his face By any likelihood he show'd to-day?

All Citizens: Amen, amen. God save thee, noble consul!

First Citizen: I say unto you, what he hath done famously, he did it to that end: though soft-conscienced men can be content to say it was for his country he did it to please his mother and to be partly proud; which he is, even till the altitude of his virtue.

VOLUMNIA: Sweet madam.

RIVERS: Have patience, madam: there's no doubt his majesty Will soon recover his accustom'd health.

Third Servingman: Under the canopy!

AUFIDIUS: Nor did you think it folly To keep your great pretences veil'd till when They needs must show themselves; which in the hatching, It seem'd, appear'd to Rome. By the discovery. We shall be shorten'd in our aim, which was To take in many towns ere almost Rome Should know we were afoot.

CORIOLANUS: For them! I cannot do it to the gods; Must I then do't to them?

Second Murderer: 'Zounds, he dies: I had forgot the reward.

AUFIDIUS: Read it not, noble lords; But tell the traitor, in the high'st degree He hath abused your powers.

GLOUCESTER: But shall I live in hope?

CLARENCE: How darkly and how deadly dost thou speak! Your eyes do menace me: why look you pale? Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come?

QUEEN ELIZABETH: And must she die for this? O, let her live, And I'll corrupt her manners, stain her beauty; Slander myself as false to Edward's bed; Throw over her the veil of infamy: So she may live unscarr'd of bleeding slaughter, I will confess she was not Edward's daughter.

Second Patrician: I would they were abed!

CORIOLANUS: I sometime lay here in Corioli At a poor man's house; he used me kindly: He cried to me; I saw him prisoner; But then Aufidius was within my view, And wrath o'erwhelm'd my pity: I request you To give my poor host freedom.

COMINIUS: Hear me, my masters, and my common friends,--

First Soldier: 'Twill be deliver'd back on good condition.

Third Citizen: He said he had wounds, which he could show in private; And with his hat, thus waving it in scorn, 'I would be consul,' says he: 'aged custom, But by your voices, will not so permit me; Your voices therefore.' When we granted that, Here was 'I thank you for your voices: thank you: Your most sweet voices: now you have left your voices, I have no further with you.' Was not this mockery?

YORK: And therefore is he idle?

First Servingman: Why do you say 'thwack our general '?

MENENIUS: This is unlikely: He and Aufidius can no more atone Than violentest contrariety.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: True, when avoided grace makes destiny: My babes were destined to a fairer death, If grace had bless'd thee with a fairer life.

CORIOLANUS: O mother, mother! What have you done? Behold, the heavens do ope, The gods look down, and this unnatural scene They laugh at. O my mother, mother! O! You have won a happy victory to Rome; But, for your son,--believe it, O, believe it, Most dangerously you have with him prevail'd, If not most mortal to him. But, let it come. Aufidius, though I cannot make true wars, I'll frame convenient peace. Now, good Aufidius, Were you in my stead, would you have heard A mother less? or granted less, Aufidius?

AEdile: Peace, peace!

Second Murderer: No, first let's reason with him.

GLOUCESTER: Ere you were queen, yea, or your husband king, I was a pack-horse in his great affairs; A weeder-out of his proud adversaries, A liberal rewarder of his friends: To royalize his blood I spilt mine own.

First Murderer: Where is thy conscience now? Visit our archive for more classic works.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: The king! why, who's that?

LARTIUS: Worthy sir, thou bleed'st; Thy exercise hath been too violent for A second course of fight.

Boy: I cannot think it. Hark! what noise is this?

VOLUMNIA: Anger's my meat; I sup upon myself, And so shall starve with feeding. Come, let's go: Leave this faint puling and lament as I do, In anger, Juno-like. Come, come, come.

CORIOLANUS: What do you prate of service?

RIVERS: Sir Richard Ratcliff, let me tell thee this: To-day shalt thou behold a subject die For truth, for duty, and for loyalty.

First Servingman: But when goes this forward?

Volsce: You will be welcome with this intelligence, Nicanor.

HASTINGS: I tell thee, man, 'tis better with me now Than when I met thee last where now we meet: Then was I going prisoner to the Tower, By the suggestion of the queen's allies; But now, I tell thee--keep it to thyself-- This day those enemies are put to death, And I in better state than e'er I was.

First Citizen: For mine own part, When I said, banish him, I said 'twas pity.

COMINIUS: Ye re goodly things, you voices!

GLOUCESTER: It is a quarrel most unnatural, To be revenged on him that loveth you.

MENENIUS: True! I'll be sworn they are true. Where is he wounded? God save your good worships! Marcius is coming home: he has more cause to be proud. Where is he wounded?

CORIOLANUS: If, Tullus, Not yet thou knowest me, and, seeing me, dost not Think me for the man I am, necessity Commands me name myself.

BRUTUS: You see how he intends to use the people.

Second Citizen: Consider you what services he has done for his country?

VIRGILIA: O heavens! O heavens!

KING RICHARD III: And brief, good mother; for I am in haste.

YORK: You mean, to bear me, not to bear with me: Uncle, my brother mocks both you and me; Because that I am little, like an ape, He thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders.

KING EDWARD IV: Dorset, embrace him; Hastings, love lord marquess.

MENENIUS: Do not stand upon't. We recommend to you, tribunes of the people, Our purpose to them: and to our noble consul Wish we all joy and honour.

MARCIUS: Here: what's the matter?

BRUTUS: By the consent of all, we were establish'd The people's magistrates.

CLARENCE: Hast thou that holy feeling in thy soul, To counsel me to make my peace with God, And art thou yet to thy own soul so blind, That thou wilt war with God by murdering me? Ah, sirs, consider, he that set you on To do this deed will hate you for the deed.

First Murderer: I would speak with Clarence, and I came hither on my legs.

MARCIUS: They are dissolved: hang 'em! They said they were an-hungry; sigh'd forth proverbs, That hunger broke stone walls, that dogs must eat, That meat was made for mouths, that the gods sent not Corn for the rich men only: with these shreds They vented their complainings; which being answer'd, And a petition granted them, a strange one-- To break the heart of generosity, And make bold power look pale--they threw their caps As they would hang them on the horns o' the moon, Shouting their emulation.

BUCKINGHAM: My Lord, I have consider'd in my mind The late demand that you did sound me in.

GLOUCESTER: You may deny that you were not the cause Of my Lord Hastings' late imprisonment.

RIVERS: My Lord of Gloucester, in those busy days Which here you urge to prove us enemies, We follow'd then our lord, our lawful king: So should we you, if you should be our king.

KING RICHARD III: Stay, madam; I must speak a word with you.

BRUTUS: God-den to you all, god-den to you all.

COMINIUS: They are worn, lord consul, so, That we shall hardly in our ages see Their banners wave again.

Second Murderer: And he that hath commanded is the king.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: As much to you, good sister! Whither away?

Messenger: Upon the stroke of four.

GLOUCESTER: My lord of Ely!

SICINIUS: To the Capitol, come: We will be there before the stream o' the people; And this shall seem, as partly 'tis, their own, Which we have goaded onward.

MENENIUS: Sirrah, if thy captain knew I were here, he would use me with estimation.

GLOUCESTER: Catesby, o'erlook the walls. Visit our archive for more classic works.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Poor heart, adieu! I pity thy complaining.

Second Citizen: Amen, sir: to my poor unworthy notice, He mock'd us when he begg'd our voices.

LADY ANNE: Black night o'ershade thy day, and death thy life!

VOLUMNIA: I prithee now, my son, Go to them, with this bonnet in thy hand; And thus far having stretch'd it--here be with them-- Thy knee bussing the stones--for in such business Action is eloquence, and the eyes of the ignorant More learned than the ears--waving thy head, Which often, thus, correcting thy stout heart, Now humble as the ripest mulberry That will not hold the handling: or say to them, Thou art their soldier, and being bred in broils Hast not the soft way which, thou dost confess, Were fit for thee to use as they to claim, In asking their good loves, but thou wilt frame Thyself, forsooth, hereafter theirs, so far As thou hast power and person.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: If he were dead, what would betide of me?

CLARENCE: Yea, Richard, when I know; for I protest As yet I do not: but, as I can learn, He hearkens after prophecies and dreams; And from the cross-row plucks the letter G. And says a wizard told him that by G His issue disinherited should be; And, for my name of George begins with G, It follows in his thought that I am he. These, as I learn, and such like toys as these Have moved his highness to commit me now. Visit our archive for more classic works.

BUCKINGHAM: My lord, I claim your gift, my due by promise, For which your honour and your faith is pawn'd; The earldom of Hereford and the moveables The which you promised I should possess.

DUCHESS OF YORK: Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold In him that did object the same to thee; He was the wretched'st thing when he was young, So long a-growing and so leisurely, That, if this rule were true, he should be gracious.

COMINIUS: I'll follow thee a month, devise with thee Where thou shalt rest, that thou mayst hear of us And we of thee: so if the time thrust forth A cause for thy repeal, we shall not send O'er the vast world to seek a single man, And lose advantage, which doth ever cool I' the absence of the needer.

MENENIUS: A noble wish.

GLOUCESTER: But I know none, and therefore am no beast.

SICINIUS: Let's hence, and hear How the dispatch is made, and in what fashion, More than his singularity, he goes Upon this present action.

VIRGILIA: No, good madam; I will not out of doors.

Second Citizen: And so did I.

Roman: The same, sir.

First Citizen: Give you good morrow, sir.

First Citizen: Come, come, we fear the worst; all shall be well.

MARCIUS: How lies their battle? know you on which side They have placed their men of trust?

SICINIUS: This is a happier and more comely time Than when these fellows ran about the streets, Crying confusion.

COMINIUS: Flower of warriors, How is it with Titus Lartius?

MARCIUS: Sir, praise me not; My work hath yet not warm'd me: fare you well: The blood I drop is rather physical Than dangerous to me: to Aufidius thus I will appear, and fight.

VIRGILIA: Give me excuse, good madam; I will obey you in every thing hereafter.

Second Senator: Stand, and go back.

First Murderer: Who made thee, then, a bloody minister, When gallant-springing brave Plantagenet, That princely novice, was struck dead by thee?

CORIOLANUS: Know, good mother, I had rather be their servant in my way, Than sway with them in theirs.

Volsce: Hath been! is it ended, then? Our state thinks not so: they are in a most warlike preparation, and hope to come upon them in the heat of their division.

Second Murderer: I pray thee, stay a while: I hope my holy humour will change; 'twas wont to hold me but while one would tell twenty.

AUFIDIUS: My noble masters, hear me speak.

SICINIUS: Where is he, hear you?

MENENIUS: This but done, Even as she speaks, why, their hearts were yours; For they have pardons, being ask'd, as free As words to little purpose.

COMINIUS: But how prevail'd you?

First Murderer: Tut, I am strong-framed, he cannot prevail with me, I warrant thee.

SICINIUS: Live, and thrive!

QUEEN ELIZABETH: I have no more sons of the royal blood For thee to murder: for my daughters, Richard, They shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens; And therefore level not to hit their lives.

HASTINGS: Good time of day unto my gracious lord!

First Murderer: We will, my noble lord.

KING EDWARD IV: Madam, yourself are not exempt in this, Nor your son Dorset, Buckingham, nor you; You have been factious one against the other, Wife, love Lord Hastings, let him kiss your hand; And what you do, do it unfeignedly.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Kind sister, thanks: we'll enter all together. And, in good time, here the lieutenant comes. Master lieutenant, pray you, by your leave, How doth the prince, and my young son of York?

BRUTUS: Farewell, kind neighbours: we wish'd Coriolanus Had loved you as we did.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: The Countess Richmond, good my Lord of Derby. To your good prayers will scarcely say amen. Yet, Derby, notwithstanding she's your wife, And loves not me, be you, good lord, assured I hate not you for her proud arrogance.

SICINIUS: Why, what of that?

KING RICHARD III: O Buckingham, now do I play the touch, To try if thou be current gold indeed Young Edward lives: think now what I would say.

Gentlewoman: Madam, the Lady Valeria is come to visit you. Visit our archive for more classic works.

HASTINGS: Good time of day unto my gracious lord! Visit our archive for more classic works.

KING RICHARD III: So.

GLOUCESTER: Never came poison from so sweet a place.

GLOUCESTER: 'Tis done by me, and ends in 'Margaret.'

QUEEN MARGARET: But repetition of what thou hast marr'd; That will I make before I let thee go.

MENENIUS: Why, 'tis no great matter; for a very little thief of occasion will rob you of a great deal of patience: give your dispositions the reins, and be angry at your pleasures; at the least if you take it as a pleasure to you in being so. You blame Marcius for being proud?

VALERIA: Verily, I do not jest with you; there came news from him last night.

First Lord: Bear from hence his body; And mourn you for him: let him be regarded As the most noble corse that ever herald Did follow to his urn.

BRUTUS: How accompanied?

First Soldier: Following the fliers at the very heels, With them he enters; who, upon the sudden, Clapp'd to their gates: he is himself alone, To answer all the city.

KING EDWARD IV: I pray thee, peace: my soul is full of sorrow.

Second Senator: The worthy fellow is our general: he's the rock, the oak not to be wind-shaken.

KING RICHARD III: Well, let that pass. Dorset is fled to Richmond.

CLARENCE: Alas! for whose sake did I that ill deed? For Edward, for my brother, for his sake: Why, sirs, He sends ye not to murder me for this For in this sin he is as deep as I. If God will be revenged for this deed. O, know you yet, he doth it publicly, Take not the quarrel from his powerful arm; He needs no indirect nor lawless course To cut off those that have offended him.

MENENIUS: All's well; and might have been much better, if He could have temporized.

CORIOLANUS: A name unmusical to the Volscians' ears, And harsh in sound to thine.

MARCIUS: They have a leader, Tullus Aufidius, that will put you to 't. I sin in envying his nobility, And were I any thing but what I am, I would wish me only he.

QUEEN MARGARET: What, dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel? And soothe the devil that I warn thee from? O, but remember this another day, When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow, And say poor Margaret was a prophetess! Live each of you the subjects to his hate, And he to yours, and all of you to God's!

First Conspirator: So he did, my lord: The army marvell'd at it, and, in the last, When he had carried Rome and that we look'd For no less spoil than glory,--

Second Murderer: O sir, it is better to be brief than tedious. Show him our commission; talk no more.

DUCHESS OF YORK: What stays had I but they? and they are gone.

SICINIUS: Consul! what consul?

CORIOLANUS: I dare be sworn you were: And, sir, it is no little thing to make Mine eyes to sweat compassion. But, good sir, What peace you'll make, advise me: for my part, I'll not to Rome, I'll back with you; and pray you, Stand to me in this cause. O mother! wife!

COMINIUS: But I fear They'll roar him in again. Tullus Aufidius, The second name of men, obeys his points As if he were his officer: desperation Is all the policy, strength and defence, That Rome can make against them.

First Senator: No, nor a man that fears you less than he, That's lesser than a little. Hark! our drums Are bringing forth our youth. We'll break our walls, Rather than they shall pound us up: our gates, Which yet seem shut, we, have but pinn'd with rushes; They'll open of themselves. Hark you. far off! There is Aufidius; list, what work he makes Amongst your cloven army. Visit our archive for more classic works.

LADY ANNE: All men, I hope, live so.

SICINIUS: First, the gods bless you for your tidings; next, Accept my thankfulness.

VOLUMNIA: Ay, fool; is that a shame? Note but this fool. Was not a man my father? Hadst thou foxship To banish him that struck more blows for Rome Than thou hast spoken words?

QUEEN ELIZABETH: That thou dost love my daughter from thy soul: So from thy soul's love didst thou love her brothers; And from my heart's love I do thank thee for it.

LADY ANNE: Where is he?

First Senator: You may not pass, you must return: our general Will no more hear from thence.

Third Citizen: Before the times of change, still is it so: By a divine instinct men's minds mistrust Ensuing dangers; as by proof, we see The waters swell before a boisterous storm. But leave it all to God. whither away?

AUFIDIUS: The town is ta'en!

AUFIDIUS: He approaches: you shall hear him.

First Servingman: Let me have war, say I; it exceeds peace as far as day does night; it's spritely, waking, audible, and full of vent. Peace is a very apoplexy, lethargy; mulled, deaf, sleepy, insensible; a getter of more bastard children than war's a destroyer of men.

Second Citizen: In him there is a hope of government, That in his nonage council under him, And in his full and ripen'd years himself, No doubt, shall then and till then govern well.

BRUTUS: We do it not alone, sir.

VIRGILIA: His bloody brow! O Jupiter, no blood!

COMINIUS: Our spoils he kick'd at, And look'd upon things precious as they were The common muck of the world: he covets less Than misery itself would give; rewards His deeds with doing them, and is content To spend the time to end it.

MENENIUS: Sir, I shall tell you. With a kind of smile, Which ne'er came from the lungs, but even thus-- For, look you, I may make the belly smile As well as speak--it tauntingly replied To the discontented members, the mutinous parts That envied his receipt; even so most fitly As you malign our senators for that They are not such as you.

BRUTUS: Call't not a plot: The people cry you mock'd them, and of late, When corn was given them gratis, you repined; Scandal'd the suppliants for the people, call'd them Time-pleasers, flatterers, foes to nobleness.

GLOUCESTER: It is too heavy for your grace to wear.

YORK: I would, that I might thank you as you call me.

MENENIUS: Nay, these are almost thoroughly persuaded; For though abundantly they lack discretion, Yet are they passing cowardly. But, I beseech you, What says the other troop?

First Murderer: No; then he will say 'twas done cowardly, when he wakes.

CORIOLANUS: The gods begin to mock me. I, that now Refused most princely gifts, am bound to beg Of my lord general.

MENENIUS: He's right noble: Let him be call'd for.

CATESBY: He for his father's sake so loves the prince, That he will not be won to aught against him.

KING RICHARD III: Wrong not her birth, she is of royal blood.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Stay, yet look back with me unto the Tower. Pity, you ancient stones, those tender babes Whom envy hath immured within your walls! Rough cradle for such little pretty ones! Rude ragged nurse, old sullen playfellow For tender princes, use my babies well! So foolish sorrow bids your stones farewell.

MENENIUS: You know neither me, yourselves nor any thing. You are ambitious for poor knaves' caps and legs: you wear out a good wholesome forenoon in hearing a cause between an orange wife and a fosset-seller; and then rejourn the controversy of three pence to a second day of audience. When you are hearing a matter between party and party, if you chance to be pinched with the colic, you make faces like mummers; set up the bloody flag against all patience; and, in roaring for a chamber-pot, dismiss the controversy bleeding the more entangled by your hearing: all the peace you make in their cause is, calling both the parties knaves. You are a pair of strange ones.

Herald: Know, Rome, that all alone Marcius did fight Within Corioli gates: where he hath won, With fame, a name to Caius Marcius; these In honour follows Coriolanus. Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!

Lord Mayor: But, my good lord, your grace's word shall serve, As well as I had seen and heard him speak And doubt you not, right noble princes both, But I'll acquaint our duteous citizens With all your just proceedings in this cause.

COMINIUS: Stand fast; We have as many friends as enemies.

All: We know't, we know't.

GLOUCESTER: That it would please thee leave these sad designs To him that hath more cause to be a mourner, And presently repair to Crosby Place; Where, after I have solemnly interr'd At Chertsey monastery this noble king, And wet his grave with my repentant tears, I will with all expedient duty see you: For divers unknown reasons. I beseech you, Grant me this boon.

CORIOLANUS: My gracious silence, hail! Wouldst thou have laugh'd had I come coffin'd home, That weep'st to see me triumph? Ay, my dear, Such eyes the widows in Corioli wear, And mothers that lack sons.

PRINCE EDWARD: Is it upon record, or else reported Successively from age to age, he built it?

MENENIUS: Calmly, I do beseech you.

MENENIUS: The matter?

CATESBY: I'll tell him what you say, my lord.

HASTINGS: I'll have this crown of mine cut from my shoulders Ere I will see the crown so foul misplaced. But canst thou guess that he doth aim at it?

GLOUCESTER: Thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine.

SICINIUS: There, Coriolanus.

PRINCE EDWARD: No, uncle; but our crosses on the way Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy I want more uncles here to welcome me.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: And wilt thou learn of me?

GLOUCESTER: By such despair, I should accuse myself.

BUCKINGHAM: My lord, this argues conscience in your grace; But the respects thereof are nice and trivial, All circumstances well considered. You say that Edward is your brother's son: So say we too, but not by Edward's wife; For first he was contract to Lady Lucy-- Your mother lives a witness to that vow-- And afterward by substitute betroth'd To Bona, sister to the King of France. These both put by a poor petitioner, A care-crazed mother of a many children, A beauty-waning and distressed widow, Even in the afternoon of her best days, Made prize and purchase of his lustful eye, Seduced the pitch and height of all his thoughts To base declension and loathed bigamy By her, in his unlawful bed, he got This Edward, whom our manners term the prince. More bitterly could I expostulate, Save that, for reverence to some alive, I give a sparing limit to my tongue. Then, good my lord, take to your royal self This proffer'd benefit of dignity; If non to bless us and the land withal, Yet to draw forth your noble ancestry From the corruption of abusing times, Unto a lineal true-derived course.

CORIOLANUS: Tell me of corn! This was my speech, and I will speak't again--

YORK: A greater gift! O, that's the sword to it.

QUEEN MARGARET: I'll not believe but they ascend the sky, And there awake God's gentle-sleeping peace. O Buckingham, take heed of yonder dog! Look, when he fawns, he bites; and when he bites, His venom tooth will rankle to the death: Have not to do with him, beware of him; Sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him, And all their ministers attend on him.

BRUTUS: We pray the gods he may deserve your loves.

First Murderer: What, art thou afraid?

MARCIUS: Come I too late?

RATCLIFF: Dispatch, my lord; the duke would be at dinner: Make a short shrift; he longs to see your head.

MENENIUS: In what enormity is Marcius poor in, that you two have not in abundance?

MENENIUS: Go, get you to your house; be gone, away! All will be naught else.

TYRREL: James Tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Come, come, my boy; we will to sanctuary. Madam, farewell.

VOLUMNIA: Now, pray, sir, get you gone: You have done a brave deed. Ere you go, hear this:-- As far as doth the Capitol exceed The meanest house in Rome, so far my son-- This lady's husband here, this, do you see-- Whom you have banish'd, does exceed you all.

LARTIUS: So, let the ports be guarded: keep your duties, As I have set them down. If I do send, dispatch Those centuries to our aid: the rest will serve For a short holding: if we lose the field, We cannot keep the town.

SICINIUS: O blessed heavens!

LOVEL: Here is the head of that ignoble traitor, The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings.

SICINIUS: Stop, Or all will fall in broil.

MENENIUS: What's the news? what's the news?

MENENIUS: What news? what news?

COMINIUS: It is your former promise.

CORIOLANUS: I would they were barbarians--as they are, Though in Rome litter'd--not Romans--as they are not, Though calved i' the porch o' the Capitol--

Second Servingman: So did I, I'll be sworn: he is simply the rarest man i' the world.

GLOUCESTER: What, marry, may she! marry with a king, A bachelor, a handsome stripling too: I wis your grandam had a worser match.

DERBY: It is, and wants but nomination.

COMINIUS: March on, my fellows: Make good this ostentation, and you shall Divide in all with us.

CLARENCE: O, no, my dream was lengthen'd after life; O, then began the tempest to my soul, Who pass'd, methought, the melancholy flood, With that grim ferryman which poets write of, Unto the kingdom of perpetual night. The first that there did greet my stranger soul, Was my great father-in-law, renowned Warwick; Who cried aloud, 'What scourge for perjury Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?' And so he vanish'd: then came wandering by A shadow like an angel, with bright hair Dabbled in blood; and he squeak'd out aloud, 'Clarence is come; false, fleeting, perjured Clarence, That stabb'd me in the field by Tewksbury; Seize on him, Furies, take him to your torments!' With that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends Environ'd me about, and howled in mine ears Such hideous cries, that with the very noise I trembling waked, and for a season after Could not believe but that I was in hell, Such terrible impression made the dream.

Third Servingman: I do not say 'thwack our general;' but he was always good enough for him.

BRUTUS: Then our office may, During his power, go sleep.

Children: What stay had we but Clarence? and he's gone.

GLOUCESTER: I would they were, that I might die at once; For now they kill me with a living death. Those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt tears, Shamed their aspect with store of childish drops: These eyes that never shed remorseful tear, No, when my father York and Edward wept, To hear the piteous moan that Rutland made When black-faced Clifford shook his sword at him; Nor when thy warlike father, like a child, Told the sad story of my father's death, And twenty times made pause to sob and weep, That all the standers-by had wet their cheeks Like trees bedash'd with rain: in that sad time My manly eyes did scorn an humble tear; And what these sorrows could not thence exhale, Thy beauty hath, and made them blind with weeping. I never sued to friend nor enemy; My tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word; But now thy beauty is proposed my fee, My proud heart sues, and prompts my tongue to speak. Teach not thy lips such scorn, for they were made For kissing, lady, not for such contempt. If thy revengeful heart cannot forgive, Lo, here I lend thee this sharp-pointed sword; Which if thou please to hide in this true bosom. And let the soul forth that adoreth thee, I lay it naked to the deadly stroke, And humbly beg the death upon my knee. Nay, do not pause; for I did kill King Henry, But 'twas thy beauty that provoked me. Nay, now dispatch; 'twas I that stabb'd young Edward, But 'twas thy heavenly face that set me on. Take up the sword again, or take up me.

Third Servingman: But when they shall see, sir, his crest up again, and the man in blood, they will out of their burrows, like conies after rain, and revel all with him.

First Murderer: Take that, and that: if all this will not do, I'll drown you in the malmsey-butt within.

Third Citizen: Stood the state so? No, no, good friends, God wot; For then this land was famously enrich'd With politic grave counsel; then the king Had virtuous uncles to protect his grace.

First Murderer: 'Zounds, it is even now at my elbow, persuading me not to kill the duke.

Roman: I know you well, sir, and you know me: your name, I think, is Adrian.

COMINIUS: The people are abused; set on. This paltering Becomes not Rome, nor has Coriolanus Deserved this so dishonour'd rub, laid falsely I' the plain way of his merit.

MENENIUS: A letter for me! it gives me an estate of seven years' health; in which time I will make a lip at the physician: the most sovereign prescription in Galen is but empiricutic, and, to this preservative, of no better report than a horse-drench. Is he not wounded? he was wont to come home wounded.

First Lord: O Tullus,--

CORIOLANUS: Have I had children's voices?

MARCIUS: I do beseech you, By all the battles wherein we have fought, By the blood we have shed together, by the vows We have made to endure friends, that you directly Set me against Aufidius and his Antiates; And that you not delay the present, but, Filling the air with swords advanced and darts, We prove this very hour.

First Soldier: Will not you go?

VIRGILIA: My lord and husband!

SICINIUS: Was ever man so proud as is this Marcius?

First Senator: Our army's in the field We never yet made doubt but Rome was ready To answer us.

MENENIUS: You worthy tribunes,-- Visit our archive for more classic works.

AUFIDIUS: I am attended at the cypress grove: I pray you-- 'Tis south the city mills--bring me word thither How the world goes, that to the pace of it I may spur on my journey.

First Servingman: I think he is: but a greater soldier than he you wot on.

First Murderer: We are, my lord; and come to have the warrant That we may be admitted where he is.

HASTINGS: So prosper I, as I swear perfect love!

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Where is kind Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey?

MENENIUS: Do you hear?

BRUTUS: They have ta'en note of us: keep on your way.

RIVERS: Were you well served, you would be taught your duty.

VIRGILIA: 'Tis not to save labour, nor that I want love.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Catesby, we come. Lords, will you go with us?

SICINIUS: Say, you chose him More after our commandment than as guided By your own true affections, and that your minds, Preoccupied with what you rather must do Than what you should, made you against the grain To voice him consul: lay the fault on us.

RIVERS: To whom in all this presence speaks your grace?

SICINIUS: Well, here he comes.

COMINIUS: The shepherd knows not thunder from a tabour More than I know the sound of Marcius' tongue From every meaner man.

BRUTUS: You know the very road into his kindness, And cannot lose your way.

COMINIUS: Hath he not pass'd the noble and the common?

BUCKINGHAM: Refuse not, mighty lord, this proffer'd love. Visit our archive for more classic works.

All: Caius Marcius Coriolanus!

Volsce: It is so, sir: truly, I have forgot you.

GLOUCESTER: Yea, and much more: but I was born so high, Our aery buildeth in the cedar's top, And dallies with the wind and scorns the sun.

Pursuivant: God hold it, to your honour's good content!

DORSET: This interchange of love, I here protest, Upon my part shall be unviolable. Visit our archive for more classic works.

LADY ANNE: Would it were mortal poison, for thy sake!

YORK: Ay, mother; but I would not have it so.

SICINIUS: Why stay we to be baited With one that wants her wits?

BRUTUS: And topping all others in boasting.

MENENIUS: Either you must Confess yourselves wondrous malicious, Or be accused of folly. I shall tell you A pretty tale: it may be you have heard it; But, since it serves my purpose, I will venture To stale 't a little more.

CORIOLANUS: Under the canopy.

KING RICHARD III: A flourish, trumpets! strike alarum, drums! Let not the heavens hear these tell-tale women Rail on the Lord's enointed: strike, I say! Either be patient, and entreat me fair, Or with the clamorous report of war Thus will I drown your exclamations.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: O thou well skill'd in curses, stay awhile, And teach me how to curse mine enemies!

GLOUCESTER: Then be your eyes the witness of this ill: See how I am bewitch'd; behold mine arm Is, like a blasted sapling, wither'd up: And this is Edward's wife, that monstrous witch, Consorted with that harlot strumpet Shore, That by their witchcraft thus have marked me.

Third Servingman: I' the city of kites and crows! What an ass it is! Then thou dwellest with daws too?

CLARENCE: Where art thou, keeper? give me a cup of wine.

First Murderer: Why, then he will say we stabbed him sleeping.

CLARENCE: But not, as I am, royal.

GLOUCESTER: Go, after, after, cousin Buckingham. The mayor towards Guildhall hies him in all post: There, at your meet'st advantage of the time, Infer the bastardy of Edward's children: Tell them how Edward put to death a citizen, Only for saying he would make his son Heir to the crown; meaning indeed his house, Which, by the sign thereof was termed so. Moreover, urge his hateful luxury And bestial appetite in change of lust; Which stretched to their servants, daughters, wives, Even where his lustful eye or savage heart, Without control, listed to make his prey. Nay, for a need, thus far come near my person: Tell them, when that my mother went with child Of that unsatiate Edward, noble York My princely father then had wars in France And, by just computation of the time, Found that the issue was not his begot; Which well appeared in his lineaments, Being nothing like the noble duke my father: But touch this sparingly, as 'twere far off, Because you know, my lord, my mother lives.

CORIOLANUS: So then the Volsces stand but as at first, Ready, when time shall prompt them, to make road. Upon's again.

DUCHESS OF YORK: His nurse! why, she was dead ere thou wert born.

VIRGILIA: The gods grant them true!

SICINIUS: Pray you, go to him.

First Soldier: He's the devil.

CORIOLANUS: The fires i' the lowest hell fold-in the people! Call me their traitor! Thou injurious tribune! Within thine eyes sat twenty thousand deaths, In thy hand clutch'd as many millions, in Thy lying tongue both numbers, I would say 'Thou liest' unto thee with a voice as free As I do pray the gods.

BUCKINGHAM: Ah, ha, my lord, this prince is not an Edward! He is not lolling on a lewd day-bed, But on his knees at meditation; Not dallying with a brace of courtezans, But meditating with two deep divines; Not sleeping, to engross his idle body, But praying, to enrich his watchful soul: Happy were England, would this gracious prince Take on himself the sovereignty thereof: But, sure, I fear, we shall ne'er win him to it.

Second Citizen: Marry, we were sent for to the justices.

DUCHESS OF YORK: Thou toad, thou toad, where is thy brother Clarence? And little Ned Plantagenet, his son?

Messenger: A messenger from the Lord Stanley.

First Senator: Then you should hate Rome, as he does. Can you, when you have pushed out your gates the very defender of them, and, in a violent popular ignorance, given your enemy your shield, think to front his revenges with the easy groans of old women, the virginal palms of your daughters, or with the palsied intercession of such a decayed dotant as you seem to be? Can you think to blow out the intended fire your city is ready to flame in, with such weak breath as this? No, you are deceived; therefore, back to Rome, and prepare for your execution: you are condemned, our general has sworn you out of reprieve and pardon.

SICINIUS: This a consul? no.

First Officer: If he did not care whether he had their love or no, he waved indifferently 'twixt doing them neither good nor harm: but he seeks their hate with greater devotion than can render it him; and leaves nothing undone that may fully discover him their opposite. Now, to seem to affect the malice and displeasure of the people is as bad as that which he dislikes, to flatter them for their love.

RIVERS: O Pomfret, Pomfret! O thou bloody prison, Fatal and ominous to noble peers! Within the guilty closure of thy walls Richard the second here was hack'd to death; And, for more slander to thy dismal seat, We give thee up our guiltless blood to drink.

CORIOLANUS: Not of a woman's tenderness to be, Requires nor child nor woman's face to see. I have sat too long.

BRUTUS: I would he had.

GLOUCESTER: A greater gift than that I'll give my cousin.

MENENIUS: Ha! Marcius coming home!

Officer: He doth appear.

Second Servingman: Come, we are fellows and friends: he was ever too hard for him; I have heard him say so himself.

ARCHBISHOP OF YORK: Last night, I hear, they lay at Northampton; At Stony-Stratford will they be to-night: To-morrow, or next day, they will be here.

SICINIUS: Make them be strong and ready for this hint, When we shall hap to give 't them.

COMINIUS: Who's yonder, That does appear as he were flay'd? O gods He has the stamp of Marcius; and I have Before-time seen him thus.

VOLUMNIA: Honourable Menenius, my boy Marcius approaches; for the love of Juno, let's go.

RIVERS: Why with some little train, my Lord of Buckingham?

MARCIUS: Sir, it is; And I am constant. Titus Lartius, thou Shalt see me once more strike at Tullus' face. What, art thou stiff? stand'st out?

SICINIUS: This is most likely!

YORK: I weigh it lightly, were it heavier.

BUCKINGHAM: Why, so you are, my thrice renowned liege.

BUCKINGHAM: Northumberland, then present, wept to see it.

KING RICHARD III: Then know, that from my soul I love thy daughter.

SICINIUS: How now, my masters! have you chose this man?

ARCHBISHOP OF YORK: Good madam, be not angry with the child.

Second Murderer: My voice is now the king's, my looks mine own.

COMINIUS: Well, on to the market-place.

Second Citizen: And will deny him: I'll have five hundred voices of that sound.

GLOUCESTER: Shall we hear from you, Catesby, ere we sleep?

QUEEN ELIZABETH: What likelihood of his amendment, lords?

Citizens: He shall, sure on't.

KING RICHARD III: Why, Buckingham, I say, I would be king,

KING RICHARD III: Ha! am I king? 'tis so: but Edward lives.

HASTINGS: My lords, at once: the cause why we are met Is, to determine of the coronation. In God's name, speak: when is the royal day?

CORIOLANUS: The god of soldiers, With the consent of supreme Jove, inform Thy thoughts with nobleness; that thou mayst prove To shame unvulnerable, and stick i' the wars Like a great sea-mark, standing every flaw, And saving those that eye thee!

Second Citizen: Truly, the souls of men are full of dread: Ye cannot reason almost with a man That looks not heavily and full of fear.

RIVERS: Saw you the king to-day, my Lord of Derby?

KING RICHARD III: I partly know the man: go, call him hither. The deep-revolving witty Buckingham No more shall be the neighbour to my counsel: Hath he so long held out with me untired, And stops he now for breath? How now! what news with you?

Third Citizen: When clouds appear, wise men put on their cloaks; When great leaves fall, the winter is at hand; When the sun sets, who doth not look for night? Untimely storms make men expect a dearth. All may be well; but, if God sort it so, 'Tis more than we deserve, or I expect.

PRINCE EDWARD: An if I live until I be a man, I'll win our ancient right in France again, Or die a soldier, as I lived a king.

First Murderer: How canst thou urge God's dreadful law to us, When thou hast broke it in so dear degree?

GLOUCESTER: Ah! and did they so?

BRUTUS: Lay hands upon him.

RATCLIFF: Make haste; the hour of death is expiate.

BRAKENBURY: Yea, are you so brief?

MENENIUS: The senators of Rome are this good belly, And you the mutinous members; for examine Their counsels and their cares, digest things rightly Touching the weal o' the common, you shall find No public benefit which you receive But it proceeds or comes from them to you And no way from yourselves. What do you think, You, the great toe of this assembly?

MENENIUS: One word more, one word. This tiger-footed rage, when it shall find The harm of unscann'd swiftness, will too late Tie leaden pounds to's heels. Proceed by process; Lest parties, as he is beloved, break out, And sack great Rome with Romans.

QUEEN MARGARET: Yea, and much better blood than his or thine.

LADY ANNE: And thou unfit for any place but hell.

Citizen: He is, and feasts the nobles of the state At his house this night.

MARCIUS: I thank you, general; But cannot make my heart consent to take A bribe to pay my sword: I do refuse it; And stand upon my common part with those That have beheld the doing.

MENENIUS: I mean, thy general.

CORIOLANUS: A goodly house: the feast smells well; but I Appear not like a guest.

VOLUMNIA: O, sir, sir, sir, I would have had you put your power well on, Before you had worn it out.

HASTINGS: The tender love I bear your grace, my lord, Makes me most forward in this noble presence To doom the offenders, whatsoever they be I say, my lord, they have deserved death.

First Citizen: The gods be good to us! Come, masters, let's home. I ever said we were i' the wrong when we banished him.

CORIOLANUS: 'Shall'! O good but most unwise patricians! why, You grave but reckless senators, have you thus Given Hydra here to choose an officer, That with his peremptory 'shall,' being but The horn and noise o' the monster's, wants not spirit To say he'll turn your current in a ditch, And make your channel his? If he have power Then vail your ignorance; if none, awake Your dangerous lenity. If you are learn'd, Be not as common fools; if you are not, Let them have cushions by you. You are plebeians, If they be senators: and they are no less, When, both your voices blended, the great'st taste Most palates theirs. They choose their magistrate, And such a one as he, who puts his 'shall,' His popular 'shall' against a graver bench Than ever frown in Greece. By Jove himself! It makes the consuls base: and my soul aches To know, when two authorities are up, Neither supreme, how soon confusion May enter 'twixt the gap of both and take The one by the other.

KING RICHARD III: Lo, at their births good stars were opposite.

SICINIUS: Meet on the market-place. We'll attend you there: Where, if you bring not Marcius, we'll proceed In our first way.

LADY ANNE: Arise, dissembler: though I wish thy death, I will not be the executioner.

SICINIUS: He's sentenced; no more hearing.

DUCHESS OF YORK: Why should calamity be full of words?

SICINIUS: The very trick on't.

Second Murderer: I'll not meddle with it: it is a dangerous thing: it makes a man a coward: a man cannot steal, but it accuseth him; he cannot swear, but it cheques him; he cannot lie with his neighbour's wife, but it detects him: 'tis a blushing shamefast spirit that mutinies in a man's bosom; it fills one full of obstacles: it made me once restore a purse of gold that I found; it beggars any man that keeps it: it is turned out of all towns and cities for a dangerous thing; and every man that means to live well endeavours to trust to himself and to live without it.

CLARENCE: Thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble.

MENENIUS: Do not cry havoc, where you should but hunt With modest warrant.

MENENIUS: Why, so: you have made good work! A pair of tribunes that have rack'd for Rome, To make coals cheap,--a noble memory!

BUCKINGHAM: I'll claim that promise at your grace's hands.

LADY ANNE: Adieu, poor soul, that takest thy leave of it!

First Citizen: Soft! who comes here?

AUFIDIUS: Do they still fly to the Roman?

BRUTUS: Enough, with over-measure.

DORSET: It toucheth you, my lord, as much as me.

VALERIA: O' my word, the father's son: I'll swear,'tis a very pretty boy. O' my troth, I looked upon him o' Wednesday half an hour together: has such a confirmed countenance. I saw him run after a gilded butterfly: and when he caught it, he let it go again; and after it again; and over and over he comes, and again; catched it again; or whether his fall enraged him, or how 'twas, he did so set his teeth and tear it; O, I warrant it, how he mammocked it!

BRUTUS: It will be dangerous to go on: no further.

VOLUMNIA: He had, before this last expedition, twenty-five wounds upon him.

GLOUCESTER: The selfsame name, but one of better nature.

CORIOLANUS: That's my brave boy!

BRUTUS: Not unlike, Each way, to better yours.

GLOUCESTER: Poor Clarence did forsake his father, Warwick; Yea, and forswore himself,--which Jesu pardon!--