Second Senator: Get you gone. Visit our archive for more classic works.

GLOUCESTER: Else wherefore breathe I in a Christian land?

MENENIUS: Peace, peace; be not so loud.

Priest: Well met, my lord; I am glad to see your honour.

MENENIUS: If, by the tribunes' leave, and yours, good people, I may be heard, I would crave a word or two; The which shall turn you to no further harm Than so much loss of time.

YORK: Grandam, one night, as we did sit at supper, My uncle Rivers talk'd how I did grow More than my brother: 'Ay,' quoth my uncle Gloucester, 'Small herbs have grace, great weeds do grow apace:' And since, methinks, I would not grow so fast, Because sweet flowers are slow and weeds make haste.

Girl: Why do you look on us, and shake your head, And call us wretches, orphans, castaways If that our noble father be alive?

LADY ANNE: Would they were basilisks, to strike thee dead!

GLOUCESTER: I do the wrong, and first begin to brawl. The secret mischiefs that I set abroach I lay unto the grievous charge of others. Clarence, whom I, indeed, have laid in darkness, I do beweep to many simple gulls Namely, to Hastings, Derby, Buckingham; And say it is the queen and her allies That stir the king against the duke my brother. Now, they believe it; and withal whet me To be revenged on Rivers, Vaughan, Grey: But then I sigh; and, with a piece of scripture, Tell them that God bids us do good for evil: And thus I clothe my naked villany With old odd ends stolen out of holy writ; And seem a saint, when most I play the devil. But, soft! here come my executioners. How now, my hardy, stout resolved mates! Are you now going to dispatch this deed?

COMINIUS: Ay, if you come not in the blood of others, But mantled in your own.

SICINIUS: I do demand, If you submit you to the people's voices, Allow their officers and are content To suffer lawful censure for such faults As shall be proved upon you?

LADY ANNE: No farther than the Tower; and, as I guess, Upon the like devotion as yourselves, To gratulate the gentle princes there.

CORIOLANUS: A match, sir. There's in all two worthy voices begged. I have your alms: adieu.

GLOUCESTER: I go; and if you plead as well for them As I can say nay to thee for myself, No doubt well bring it to a happy issue.

Senators: To Coriolanus come all joy and honour!

GLOUCESTER: Your beauty was the cause of that effect; Your beauty: which did haunt me in my sleep To undertake the death of all the world, So I might live one hour in your sweet bosom.

LADY ANNE: I hope so.

BRUTUS: Only make trial what your love can do For Rome, towards Marcius.

MENENIUS: So do I too, if it be not too much: brings a' victory in his pocket? the wounds become him.

Messenger: They lie in view; but have not spoke as yet.

KING RICHARD III: Come, come, you mock me; this is not the way To win our daughter.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Thus have you breathed your curse against yourself.

Messenger: The mighty dukes Gloucester and Buckingham.

First Murderer: Ho! who's here?

BRUTUS: What's the matter?

YORK: Marry, my uncle Clarence' angry ghost: My grandam told me he was murdered there.

Second Murderer: Nor you, as we are, loyal.

AUFIDIUS: Name not the god, thou boy of tears!

QUEEN ELIZABETH: O, that thou wouldst as well afford a grave As thou canst yield a melancholy seat! Then would I hide my bones, not rest them here. O, who hath any cause to mourn but I?

MENENIUS: A hundred thousand welcomes. I could weep And I could laugh, I am light and heavy. Welcome. A curse begin at very root on's heart, That is not glad to see thee! You are three That Rome should dote on: yet, by the faith of men, We have some old crab-trees here at home that will not Be grafted to your relish. Yet welcome, warriors: We call a nettle but a nettle and The faults of fools but folly.

VOLUMNIA: You are too absolute; Though therein you can never be too noble, But when extremities speak. I have heard you say, Honour and policy, like unsever'd friends, I' the war do grow together: grant that, and tell me, In peace what each of them by the other lose, That they combine not there.

HASTINGS: Come, come, have with you. Wot you what, my lord? To-day the lords you talk of are beheaded.

SICINIUS: Sir, how comes't that you Have holp to make this rescue?

First Senator: Marcius, 'tis true that you have lately told us; The Volsces are in arms.

TYRREL: Prove me, my gracious sovereign.

CORIOLANUS: Your enigma?

CATESBY: Call them again, my lord, and accept their suit.

First Murderer: I thought thou hadst been resolute.

SICINIUS: Draw near, ye people.

MARCIUS: How far off lie these armies?

MENENIUS: Come, come, you have been too rough, something too rough; You must return and mend it.

PRINCE EDWARD: Good lords, make all the speedy haste you may. Say, uncle Gloucester, if our brother come, Where shall we sojourn till our coronation?

DUCHESS OF YORK: If so, then be not tongue-tied: go with me. And in the breath of bitter words let's smother My damned son, which thy two sweet sons smother'd. I hear his drum: be copious in exclaims.

DORSET: Dispute not with her; she is lunatic.

COMINIUS: Breathe you, my friends: well fought; we are come off Like Romans, neither foolish in our stands, Nor cowardly in retire: believe me, sirs, We shall be charged again. Whiles we have struck, By interims and conveying gusts we have heard The charges of our friends. Ye Roman gods! Lead their successes as we wish our own, That both our powers, with smiling fronts encountering, May give you thankful sacrifice. Thy news?

Pursuivant: The better that your lordship please to ask.

First Senator: Be it so; go back: the virtue of your name Is not here passable.

Volsce: He cannot choose. I am most fortunate, thus accidentally to encounter you: you have ended my business, and I will merrily accompany you home.

HASTINGS: My hair doth stand on end to hear her curses.

YORK: If 'twere not she, I cannot tell who told me.

First Murderer: Back to the Duke of Gloucester, tell him so.

CLARENCE: Tell him, when that our princely father York Bless'd his three sons with his victorious arm, And charged us from his soul to love each other, He little thought of this divided friendship: Bid Gloucester think of this, and he will weep.

DORSET: Be of good cheer: mother, how fares your grace?

MENENIUS: Consider this: he has been bred i' the wars Since he could draw a sword, and is ill school'd In bolted language; meal and bran together He throws without distinction. Give me leave, I'll go to him, and undertake to bring him Where he shall answer, by a lawful form, In peace, to his utmost peril.

GLOUCESTER: Bid me farewell.

BUCKINGHAM: Refuse not, mighty lord, this proffer'd love.

Second Lord: Peace, ho! no outrage: peace! The man is noble and his fame folds-in This orb o' the earth. His last offences to us Shall have judicious hearing. Stand, Aufidius, And trouble not the peace.

VOLUMNIA: Good ladies, let's go. Yes, yes, yes; the senate has letters from the general, wherein he gives my son the whole name of the war: he hath in this action outdone his former deeds doubly

BRUTUS: Sir, those cold ways, That seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous Where the disease is violent. Lay hands upon him, And bear him to the rock.

CORIOLANUS: Direct me, if it be your will, Where great Aufidius lies: is he in Antium?

Lord Mayor: God bless your grace with health and happy days!

QUEEN MARGARET: Thy woes will make them sharp, and pierce like mine.

KING RICHARD III: Madam, so thrive I in my enterprise And dangerous success of bloody wars, As I intend more good to you and yours, Than ever you or yours were by me wrong'd!

GREY: Now Margaret's curse is fall'n upon our heads, For standing by when Richard stabb'd her son.

GLOUCESTER: Naught to do with mistress Shore! I tell thee, fellow, He that doth naught with her, excepting one, Were best he do it secretly, alone.

LARTIUS: What is become of Marcius?

MENENIUS: Repent what you have spoke.

First Senator: Tribunes, give way; he shall to the market-place.

CORIOLANUS: Saw you Aufidius?

MENENIUS: This is strange.

QUEEN MARGARET: Hie thee to hell for shame, and leave the world, Thou cacodemon! there thy kingdom is.

VOLUMNIA: I prithee now, sweet son, as thou hast said My praises made thee first a soldier, so, To have my praise for this, perform a part Thou hast not done before.

First Senator: Faith, sir, if you had told as many lies in his behalf as you have uttered words in your own, you should not pass here; no, though it were as virtuous to lie as to live chastely. Therefore, go back.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: My daughter's mother thinks it with her soul.

LADY ANNE: Thou art the cause, and most accursed effect.

BRUTUS: Seize him, AEdiles!

AUFIDIUS: Wert thou the Hector That was the whip of your bragg'd progeny, Thou shouldst not scape me here. Officious, and not valiant, you have shamed me In your condemned seconds.

BUCKINGHAM: To-morrow will it please you to be crown'd?

LARTIUS: How often he had met you, sword to sword; That of all things upon the earth he hated Your person most, that he would pawn his fortunes To hopeless restitution, so he might Be call'd your vanquisher.

Volsce: Coriolanus banished!

CORIOLANUS: I will go wash; And when my face is fair, you shall perceive Whether I blush or no: howbeit, I thank you. I mean to stride your steed, and at all times To undercrest your good addition To the fairness of my power.

HASTINGS: 'Tis like enough, for I stay dinner there.

BUCKINGHAM: My Lord!

DORSET: Comfort, dear mother: God is much displeased That you take with unthankfulness, his doing: In common worldly things, 'tis call'd ungrateful, With dull unwilligness to repay a debt Which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent; Much more to be thus opposite with heaven, For it requires the royal debt it lent you.

Messenger: So it should seem by that I have to say. First, he commends him to your noble lordship.

CORIOLANUS: Ha! what is that?

GLOUCESTER: So do I ever: being well-advised. For had I cursed now, I had cursed myself.

GLOUCESTER: Have done thy charm, thou hateful wither'd hag!

MENENIUS: The senate, Coriolanus, are well pleased To make thee consul.

BUCKINGHAM: Good Catesby, go, effect this business soundly.

DUCHESS OF YORK: O, she that might have intercepted thee, By strangling thee in her accursed womb From all the slaughters, wretch, that thou hast done!

BRUTUS: Come, come, you are well understood to be a perfecter giber for the table than a necessary bencher in the Capitol. Visit our archive for more classic works.

BRAKENBURY: I am, in this, commanded to deliver The noble Duke of Clarence to your hands: I will not reason what is meant hereby, Because I will be guiltless of the meaning. Here are the keys, there sits the duke asleep: I'll to the king; and signify to him That thus I have resign'd my charge to you.

AEdile: He's coming.

MENENIUS: I'll keep you company. Will you along?

GLOUCESTER: What doth she say, my Lord of Buckingham?

First Murderer: Remember our reward, when the deed is done.

VOLUMNIA: Ay, worthy Menenius; and with most prosperous approbation. Visit our archive for more classic works.

Second Murderer: Look behind you, my lord.

DUCHESS OF YORK: I had a Richard too, and thou didst kill him; I had a Rutland too, thou holp'st to kill him.

BRUTUS: Come, we'll inform them Of our proceedings here: on the marketplace, I know, they do attend us.

MENENIUS: Only fair speech.

GLOUCESTER: And look to have it yielded with all willingness. Come, let us sup betimes, that afterwards We may digest our complots in some form.

CORIOLANUS: Come, leave your tears: a brief farewell: the beast With many heads butts me away. Nay, mother, Where is your ancient courage? you were used To say extremity was the trier of spirits; That common chances common men could bear; That when the sea was calm all boats alike Show'd mastership in floating; fortune's blows, When most struck home, being gentle wounded, craves A noble cunning: you were used to load me With precepts that would make invincible The heart that conn'd them.

SICINIUS: Such a nature, Tickled with good success, disdains the shadow Which he treads on at noon: but I do wonder His insolence can brook to be commanded Under Cominius.

BRUTUS: I do not like this news.

First Citizen: Once, if he do require our voices, we ought not to deny him.

GLOUCESTER: Even so; an't please your worship, Brakenbury, You may partake of any thing we say: We speak no treason, man: we say the king Is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen Well struck in years, fair, and not jealous; We say that Shore's wife hath a pretty foot, A cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue; And that the queen's kindred are made gentle-folks: How say you sir? Can you deny all this? Visit our archive for more classic works.

Messenger: You are sent for to the Capitol. 'Tis thought That Marcius shall be consul: I have seen the dumb men throng to see him and The blind to bear him speak: matrons flung gloves, Ladies and maids their scarfs and handkerchers, Upon him as he pass'd: the nobles bended, As to Jove's statue, and the commons made A shower and thunder with their caps and shouts: I never saw the like.

MENENIUS: See you yond coign o' the Capitol, yond corner-stone?

BRUTUS: Go not home.

GLOUCESTER: Humbly complaining to her deity Got my lord chamberlain his liberty. I'll tell you what; I think it is our way, If we will keep in favour with the king, To be her men and wear her livery: The jealous o'erworn widow and herself, Since that our brother dubb'd them gentlewomen. Are mighty gossips in this monarchy.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: God grant him health! Did you confer with him?

QUEEN MARGARET: Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet. Edward for Edward pays a dying debt.

SICINIUS: It is a mind That shall remain a poison where it is, Not poison any further.

RIVERS: What, marry, may she?

Both Tribunes: Well, say. Peace, ho!

MENENIUS: Pray you, who does the wolf love?

SICINIUS: Where is this viper That would depopulate the city and Be every man himself?

CORIOLANUS: Measureless liar, thou hast made my heart Too great for what contains it. Boy! O slave! Pardon me, lords, 'tis the first time that ever I was forced to scold. Your judgments, my grave lords, Must give this cur the lie: and his own notion-- Who wears my stripes impress'd upon him; that Must bear my beating to his grave--shall join To thrust the lie unto him.

SICINIUS: Noble Menenius, Be you then as the people's officer. Masters, lay down your weapons.

CORIOLANUS: At Antium lives he?

VOLUMNIA: I' the shoulder and i' the left arm there will be large cicatrices to show the people, when he shall stand for his place. He received in the repulse of Tarquin seven hurts i' the body.

GLOUCESTER: Say that I slew them not?

MENENIUS: No, I'll not go: you hear what he hath said Which was sometime his general; who loved him In a most dear particular. He call'd me father: But what o' that? Go, you that banish'd him; A mile before his tent fall down, and knee The way into his mercy: nay, if he coy'd To hear Cominius speak, I'll keep at home.

VIRGILIA: O, good madam, there can be none yet.

GLOUCESTER: Plantagenet.

QUEEN MARGARET: If ancient sorrow be most reverend, Give mine the benefit of seniory, And let my woes frown on the upper hand. If sorrow can admit society, Tell o'er your woes again by viewing mine: I had an Edward, till a Richard kill'd him; I had a Harry, till a Richard kill'd him: Thou hadst an Edward, till a Richard kill'd him; Thou hadst a Richard, till a Richard killed him;

Fifth Citizen: We hope to find you our friend; and therefore give you our voices heartily.

Second Citizen: Would you proceed especially against Caius Marcius?

VOLUMNIA: Prithee now, Go, and be ruled: although I know thou hadst rather Follow thine enemy in a fiery gulf Than flatter him in a bower. Here is Cominius.

COMINIUS: Ever right.

Citizens: It shall be so, it shall be so.

Second Senator: Howsoever you have been his liar, as you say you have, I am one that, telling true under him, must say, you cannot pass. Therefore, go back.

First Officer: Come, come, they are almost here. How many stand for consulships?

First Servingman: He was too hard for him directly, to say the troth on't: before Corioli he scotched him and notched him like a carbon ado.

CORIOLANUS: Pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of your voices that I may be consul, I have here the customary gown.

MENENIUS: Ay, to devour him; as the hungry plebeians would the noble Marcius.

Page: My lord? Visit our archive for more classic works.

Lord Mayor: Now, fair befall you! he deserved his death; And you my good lords, both have well proceeded, To warn false traitors from the like attempts. I never look'd for better at his hands, After he once fell in with Mistress Shore.

GLOUCESTER: Come, let us to our holy task again. Farewell, good cousin; farewell, gentle friends.

KING RICHARD III: Give me thy hand. Thus high, by thy advice And thy assistance, is King Richard seated; But shall we wear these honours for a day? Or shall they last, and we rejoice in them?

RIVERS: Come, Grey, come, Vaughan, let us all embrace: And take our leave, until we meet in heaven.

MENENIUS: Be calm, be calm.

BRUTUS: Sir, I hope My words disbench'd you not.

CORIOLANUS: Let them hang.

MENENIUS: Now, the gods crown thee!

CATESBY: My good lords both, with all the heed I may.

LARTIUS: He did, my lord.

DUCHESS OF YORK: I prithee, hear me speak.

MARCIUS: Within these three hours, Tullus, Alone I fought in your Corioli walls, And made what work I pleased: 'tis not my blood Wherein thou seest me mask'd; for thy revenge Wrench up thy power to the highest.

VOLUMNIA: Take my prayers with you. I would the gods had nothing else to do But to confirm my curses! Could I meet 'em But once a-day, it would unclog my heart Of what lies heavy to't.

CLARENCE: I shall be reconciled to him again.

GLOUCESTER: I was provoked by her slanderous tongue, which laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.

MENENIUS: For corn at their own rates; whereof, they say, The city is well stored.

MENENIUS: You have stood your limitation; and the tribunes Endue you with the people's voice: remains That, in the official marks invested, you Anon do meet the senate.

CLARENCE: We know thy charge, Brakenbury, and will obey.

CORIOLANUS: I'll give my reasons, More worthier than their voices. They know the corn Was not our recompense, resting well assured That ne'er did service for't: being press'd to the war, Even when the navel of the state was touch'd, They would not thread the gates. This kind of service Did not deserve corn gratis. Being i' the war Their mutinies and revolts, wherein they show'd Most valour, spoke not for them: the accusation Which they have often made against the senate, All cause unborn, could never be the motive Of our so frank donation. Well, what then? How shall this bisson multitude digest The senate's courtesy? Let deeds express What's like to be their words: 'we did request it; We are the greater poll, and in true fear They gave us our demands.' Thus we debase The nature of our seats and make the rabble Call our cares fears; which will in time Break ope the locks o' the senate and bring in The crows to peck the eagles.

MARCIUS: Go, get you home, you fragments!

DERBY: God make your majesty joyful as you have been!

BRUTUS: Seize him, AEdiles! Visit our archive for more classic works.

LADY ANNE: That shall you know hereafter.

Third Servingman: What fellow's this?

LADY ANNE: Why, then they are not dead: But dead they are, and devilish slave, by thee.

GLOUCESTER: No doubt, no doubt; and so shall Clarence too; For they that were your enemies are his, And have prevail'd as much on him as you.

SICINIUS: And affecting one sole throne, Without assistance.

CORIOLANUS: Thank you, sir: farewell. O world, thy slippery turns! Friends now fast sworn, Whose double bosoms seem to wear one heart, Whose house, whose bed, whose meal, and exercise, Are still together, who twin, as 'twere, in love Unseparable, shall within this hour, On a dissension of a doit, break out To bitterest enmity: so, fellest foes, Whose passions and whose plots have broke their sleep, To take the one the other, by some chance, Some trick not worth an egg, shall grow dear friends And interjoin their issues. So with me: My birth-place hate I, and my love's upon This enemy town. I'll enter: if he slay me, He does fair justice; if he give me way, I'll do his country service.

MENENIUS: Fie, fie, fie!

BRUTUS: Not to them all.

CORIOLANUS: Why then should I be consul? By yond clouds, Let me deserve so ill as you, and make me Your fellow tribune.

Lieutenant: Yet I wish, sir,-- I mean for your particular,--you had not Join'd in commission with him; but either Had borne the action of yourself, or else To him had left it solely.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: By Him that raised me to this careful height From that contented hap which I enjoy'd, I never did incense his majesty Against the Duke of Clarence, but have been An earnest advocate to plead for him. My lord, you do me shameful injury, Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.

GLOUCESTER: Upon what cause?

KING RICHARD III: I will converse with iron-witted fools And unrespective boys: none are for me That look into me with considerate eyes: High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect. Boy!

HASTINGS: And so swear I, my lord

BUCKINGHAM: Sorry I am my noble cousin should Suspect me, that I mean no good to him: By heaven, I come in perfect love to him; And so once more return and tell his grace. When holy and devout religious men Are at their beads, 'tis hard to draw them thence, So sweet is zealous contemplation.

GLOUCESTER: He is; and, see, he brings the mayor along.

First Murderer: Thy brother's love, our duty, and thy fault, Provoke us hither now to slaughter thee.

Second Citizen: Bad news, by'r lady; seldom comes the better: I fear, I fear 'twill prove a troublous world.

GLOUCESTER: Meantime, God grants that we have need of you: Your brother is imprison'd by your means, Myself disgraced, and the nobility Held in contempt; whilst many fair promotions Are daily given to ennoble those That scarce, some two days since, were worth a noble.

Second Citizen: Why that way?

MENENIUS: O, true-bred!

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Go, go, poor soul, I envy not thy glory To feed my humour, wish thyself no harm.

DUCHESS OF YORK: I will be mild and gentle in my speech.

First Senator: You are a Roman, are you?

LARTIUS: Marcius, his name? Visit our archive for more classic works.

Second Senator: Come, my captain knows you not.

CORIOLANUS: Which is his house, beseech you?

First Citizen: Ay, sir; well, well.

HASTINGS: With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must: But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanks That were the cause of my imprisonment.

LADY ANNE: What, do you tremble? are you all afraid? Alas, I blame you not; for you are mortal, And mortal eyes cannot endure the devil. Avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell! Thou hadst but power over his mortal body, His soul thou canst not have; therefore be gone.

First Murderer: Offended us you have not, but the king.

AUFIDIUS: Go tell the lords o' the city I am here: Deliver them this paper: having read it, Bid them repair to the market place; where I, Even in theirs and in the commons' ears, Will vouch the truth of it. Him I accuse The city ports by this hath enter'd and Intends to appear before the people, hoping To purge herself with words: dispatch. Most welcome!

BUCKINGHAM: Look I so pale, Lord Dorset, as the rest?

BRUTUS: We stood to't in good time. Is this Menenius?

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Send to her, by the man that slew her brothers, A pair of bleeding-hearts; thereon engrave Edward and York; then haply she will weep: Therefore present to her--as sometime Margaret Did to thy father, steep'd in Rutland's blood,-- A handkerchief; which, say to her, did drain The purple sap from her sweet brother's body And bid her dry her weeping eyes therewith. If this inducement force her not to love, Send her a story of thy noble acts; Tell her thou madest away her uncle Clarence, Her uncle Rivers; yea, and, for her sake, Madest quick conveyance with her good aunt Anne.

First Murderer: Tush! Fear not, my lord, we will not stand to prate; Talkers are no good doers: be assured We come to use our hands and not our tongues.

First Murderer: Take him over the costard with the hilts of thy sword, and then we will chop him in the malmsey-butt in the next room.

COMINIUS: Ay; and you'll look pale Before you find it other. All the regions Do smilingly revolt; and who resist Are mock'd for valiant ignorance, And perish constant fools. Who is't can blame him? Your enemies and his find something in him.

First Senator: Now, sir, is your name Menenius?

BUCKINGHAM: Still live they and for ever may they last!

GLOUCESTER: Villains, set down the corse; or, by Saint Paul, I'll make a corse of him that disobeys.

MENENIUS: Worthy man!

CORIOLANUS: We will before the walls of Rome tomorrow Set down our host. My partner in this action, You must report to the Volscian lords, how plainly I have borne this business.

GLOUCESTER: I cannot blame her: by God's holy mother, She hath had too much wrong; and I repent My part thereof that I have done to her.

BUCKINGHAM: I fear he will. How now, Catesby, what says your lord?

KING RICHARD III: No, to the dignity and height of honour The high imperial type of this earth's glory.

AUFIDIUS: My rage is gone; And I am struck with sorrow. Take him up. Help, three o' the chiefest soldiers; I'll be one. Beat thou the drum, that it speak mournfully: Trail your steel pikes. Though in this city he Hath widow'd and unchilded many a one, Which to this hour bewail the injury, Yet he shall have a noble memory. Assist.

CORIOLANUS: What, what, what! I shall be loved when I am lack'd. Nay, mother. Resume that spirit, when you were wont to say, If you had been the wife of Hercules, Six of his labours you'ld have done, and saved Your husband so much sweat. Cominius, Droop not; adieu. Farewell, my wife, my mother: I'll do well yet. Thou old and true Menenius, Thy tears are salter than a younger man's, And venomous to thine eyes. My sometime general, I have seen thee stem, and thou hast oft beheld Heart-hardening spectacles; tell these sad women 'Tis fond to wail inevitable strokes, As 'tis to laugh at 'em. My mother, you wot well My hazards still have been your solace: and Believe't not lightly--though I go alone, Like to a lonely dragon, that his fen Makes fear'd and talk'd of more than seen--your son Will or exceed the common or be caught With cautelous baits and practise.

Lord Mayor: Marry, God forbid his grace should say us nay!

MENENIUS: Well said, noble woman? Before he should thus stoop to the herd, but that The violent fit o' the time craves it as physic For the whole state, I would put mine armour on, Which I can scarcely bear.

KING RICHARD III: Stanley, he is your wife's son well, look to it.

Girl: Our fatherless distress was left unmoan'd; Your widow-dolour likewise be unwept!

GLOUCESTER: Will not the mayor then and his brethren come?

CLARENCE: Are you call'd forth from out a world of men To slay the innocent? What is my offence? Where are the evidence that do accuse me? What lawful quest have given their verdict up Unto the frowning judge? or who pronounced The bitter sentence of poor Clarence' death? Before I be convict by course of law, To threaten me with death is most unlawful. I charge you, as you hope to have redemption By Christ's dear blood shed for our grievous sins, That you depart and lay no hands on me The deed you undertake is damnable.

MENENIUS: Has he disciplined Aufidius soundly?

First Citizen: No, no; by God's good grace his son shall reign.

Lord Mayor: What, had he so?

CLARENCE: Relent, and save your souls.

LARTIUS: O,'tis Marcius! Let's fetch him off, or make remain alike.

SICINIUS: You show too much of that For which the people stir: if you will pass To where you are bound, you must inquire your way, Which you are out of, with a gentler spirit, Or never be so noble as a consul, Nor yoke with him for tribune.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: It is determined, not concluded yet: But so it must be, if the king miscarry.

Seventh Citizen: Therefore let him be consul: the gods give him joy, and make him good friend to the people!

VOLUMNIA: I have lived To see inherited my very wishes And the buildings of my fancy: only There's one thing wanting, which I doubt not but Our Rome will cast upon thee.

CORIOLANUS: I' the city of kites and crows.

YORK: What, will you go unto the Tower, my lord?

GLOUCESTER: Foul wrinkled witch, what makest thou in my sight?

VIRGILIA: Beseech you, give me leave to retire myself.

GLOUCESTER: If I should be! I had rather be a pedlar: Far be it from my heart, the thought of it!

BRUTUS: Go about it. Put him to choler straight: he hath been used Ever to conquer, and to have his worth Of contradiction: being once chafed, he cannot Be rein'd again to temperance; then he speaks What's in his heart; and that is there which looks With us to break his neck.

CORIOLANUS: What is the matter That being pass'd for consul with full voice, I am so dishonour'd that the very hour You take it off again?

First Citizen: Ay, that the king is dead.

Second Messenger: As certain as I know the sun is fire: Where have you lurk'd, that you make doubt of it? Ne'er through an arch so hurried the blown tide, As the recomforted through the gates. Why, hark you! The trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries and fifes, Tabours and cymbals and the shouting Romans, Make the sun dance. Hark you!

SICINIUS: Come, what talk you Of Marcius?

BRUTUS: Why, shall the people give One that speaks thus their voice?

MENENIUS: Good my friends, If you have heard your general talk of Rome, And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks, My name hath touch'd your ears it is Menenius.

First Senator: There's no remedy; Unless, by not so doing, our good city Cleave in the midst, and perish.

BRUTUS: The present wars devour him: he is grown Too proud to be so valiant.

CORIOLANUS: Ay; 'tis an honester service than to meddle with thy mistress. Thou pratest, and pratest; serve with thy trencher, hence!

VIRGILIA: I will wish her speedy strength, and visit her with my prayers; but I cannot go thither.

VOLUMNIA: On's brows: Menenius, he comes the third time home with the oaken garland.

HASTINGS: So thrive I, as I truly swear the like!

LARTIUS: O general, Here is the steed, we the caparison: Hadst thou beheld--

BRUTUS: Mark'd you his lip and eyes?

QUEEN MARGARET: Thou hadst a Clarence too, and Richard kill'd him. From forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept A hell-hound that doth hunt us all to death: That dog, that had his teeth before his eyes, To worry lambs and lap their gentle blood, That foul defacer of God's handiwork, That excellent grand tyrant of the earth, That reigns in galled eyes of weeping souls, Thy womb let loose, to chase us to our graves. O upright, just, and true-disposing God, How do I thank thee, that this carnal cur Preys on the issue of his mother's body, And makes her pew-fellow with others' moan!

Second Officer: Faith, there had been many great men that have flattered the people, who ne'er loved them; and there be many that they have loved, they know not wherefore: so that, if they love they know not why, they hate upon no better a ground: therefore, for Coriolanus neither to care whether they love or hate him manifests the true knowledge he has in their disposition; and out of his noble carelessness lets them plainly see't.

CORIOLANUS: Ay, by and by; But we will drink together; and you shall bear A better witness back than words, which we, On like conditions, will have counter-seal'd. Come, enter with us. Ladies, you deserve To have a temple built you: all the swords In Italy, and her confederate arms, Could not have made this peace.

LADY ANNE: Set down, set down your honourable load, If honour may be shrouded in a hearse, Whilst I awhile obsequiously lament The untimely fall of virtuous Lancaster. Poor key-cold figure of a holy king! Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster! Thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood! Be it lawful that I invocate thy ghost, To hear the lamentations of Poor Anne, Wife to thy Edward, to thy slaughter'd son, Stabb'd by the selfsame hand that made these wounds! Lo, in these windows that let forth thy life, I pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes. Cursed be the hand that made these fatal holes! Cursed be the heart that had the heart to do it! Cursed the blood that let this blood from hence! More direful hap betide that hated wretch, That makes us wretched by the death of thee, Than I can wish to adders, spiders, toads, Or any creeping venom'd thing that lives! If ever he have child, abortive be it, Prodigious, and untimely brought to light, Whose ugly and unnatural aspect May fright the hopeful mother at the view; And that be heir to his unhappiness! If ever he have wife, let her he made A miserable by the death of him As I am made by my poor lord and thee! Come, now towards Chertsey with your holy load, Taken from Paul's to be interred there; And still, as you are weary of the weight, Rest you, whiles I lament King Henry's corse.

KING RICHARD III: What is his name?

BRAKENBURY: Awaked you not with this sore agony?

Third Conspirator: Sir, his stoutness When he did stand for consul, which he lost By lack of stooping,--

SICINIUS: What then?

KING RICHARD III: Richmond! When last I was at Exeter, The mayor in courtesy show'd me the castle, And call'd it Rougemont: at which name I started, Because a bard of Ireland told me once I should not live long after I saw Richmond.

Citizens: Yield, Marcius, yield!

GLOUCESTER: What, think You we are Turks or infidels? Or that we would, against the form of law, Proceed thus rashly to the villain's death, But that the extreme peril of the case, The peace of England and our persons' safety, Enforced us to this execution?

MENENIUS: That's off, that's off; I would you rather had been silent. Please you To hear Cominius speak?

VALERIA: My ladies both, good day to you.

YORK: O, then, I see, you will part but with light gifts; In weightier things you'll say a beggar nay.

BUCKINGHAM: To-morrow, then, we will attend your grace: And so most joyfully we take our leave.

Second Murderer: Spoke like a tail fellow that respects his reputation. Come, shall we to this gear?

BUCKINGHAM: What, my gracious lord?

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Say then, who dost thou mean shall be her king?

CATESBY: My lord, He wonders to what end you have assembled Such troops of citizens to speak with him, His grace not being warn'd thereof before: My lord, he fears you mean no good to him.

SICINIUS: 'Tis this slave;-- Go whip him, 'fore the people's eyes:--his raising; Nothing but his report.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: There is no other way Unless thou couldst put on some other shape, And not be Richard that hath done all this.

BRUTUS: Raised only, that the weaker sort may wish Good Marcius home again.

GLOUCESTER: Than my Lord Hastings no man might be bolder; His lordship knows me well, and loves me well.

YORK: Well, my dread lord; so must I call you now.

LADY ANNE: 'Tis more than you deserve; But since you teach me how to flatter you, Imagine I have said farewell already.

MENENIUS: Why, masters, my good friends, mine honest neighbours, Will you undo yourselves?

Messenger: The sum of all I can, I have disclosed; Why or for what these nobles were committed Is all unknown to me, my gracious lady.

SICINIUS: Nay. but his taunts.

BUCKINGHAM: Now, in good time, here comes the Duke of York.

GLOUCESTER: When I was last in Holborn, I saw good strawberries in your garden there I do beseech you send for some of them.

Third Servingman: Why, here's he that was wont to thwack our general, Caius Marcius.

KING RICHARD III: And buried, gentle Tyrrel?

HASTINGS: But I shall laugh at this a twelve-month hence, That they who brought me in my master's hate I live to look upon their tragedy. I tell thee, Catesby--

RATCLIFF: Dispatch; the limit of your lives is out.

SICINIUS: Menenius, you are known well enough too.

Citizens: The gods preserve you both!

VOLUMNIA: Pray, be counsell'd: I have a heart as little apt as yours, But yet a brain that leads my use of anger To better vantage.

CORIOLANUS: I muse my mother Does not approve me further, who was wont To call them woollen vassals, things created To buy and sell with groats, to show bare heads In congregations, to yawn, be still and wonder, When one but of my ordinance stood up To speak of peace or war. I talk of you: Why did you wish me milder? would you have me False to my nature? Rather say I play The man I am.

Second Senator: Get you gone.

MENENIUS: What should I do?

GLOUCESTER: Let him thank me, that holp to send him thither; For he was fitter for that place than earth.

BUCKINGHAM: If you refuse it,--as, in love and zeal, Loath to depose the child, Your brother's son; As well we know your tenderness of heart And gentle, kind, effeminate remorse, Which we have noted in you to your kin, And egally indeed to all estates,-- Yet whether you accept our suit or no, Your brother's son shall never reign our king; But we will plant some other in the throne, To the disgrace and downfall of your house: And in this resolution here we leave you.-- Come, citizens: 'zounds! I'll entreat no more.

GLOUCESTER: We are the queen's abjects, and must obey. Brother, farewell: I will unto the king; And whatsoever you will employ me in, Were it to call King Edward's widow sister, I will perform it to enfranchise you. Meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood Touches me deeper than you can imagine.

MENENIUS: I tell thee, fellow, The general is my lover: I have been The book of his good acts, whence men have read His name unparallel'd, haply amplified; For I have ever verified my friends, Of whom he's chief, with all the size that verity Would without lapsing suffer: nay, sometimes, Like to a bowl upon a subtle ground, I have tumbled past the throw; and in his praise Have almost stamp'd the leasing: therefore, fellow, I must have leave to pass.

VOLUMNIA: O, stand up blest! Whilst, with no softer cushion than the flint, I kneel before thee; and unproperly Show duty, as mistaken all this while Between the child and parent.

Second Conspirator: Most noble sir, If you do hold the same intent wherein You wish'd us parties, we'll deliver you Of your great danger.

KING RICHARD III: Stand all apart Cousin of Buckingham!

DUCHESS OF YORK: Art thou my son?

CORIOLANUS: Pray, be content: Mother, I am going to the market-place; Chide me no more. I'll mountebank their loves, Cog their hearts from them, and come home beloved Of all the trades in Rome. Look, I am going: Commend me to my wife. I'll return consul; Or never trust to what my tongue can do I' the way of flattery further.

LORD STANLEY: Let me but meet you, ladies, one hour hence, And I'll salute your grace of York as mother, And reverend looker on, of two fair queens. Come, madam, you must straight to Westminster, There to be crowned Richard's royal queen.

BUCKINGHAM: Lord mayor, the reason we have sent--

BUCKINGHAM: But since you come too late of our intents, Yet witness what you hear we did intend: And so, my good lord mayor, we bid farewell.

TYRREL: The tyrannous and bloody deed is done. The most arch of piteous massacre That ever yet this land was guilty of. Dighton and Forrest, whom I did suborn To do this ruthless piece of butchery, Although they were flesh'd villains, bloody dogs, Melting with tenderness and kind compassion Wept like two children in their deaths' sad stories. 'Lo, thus' quoth Dighton, 'lay those tender babes:' 'Thus, thus,' quoth Forrest, 'girdling one another Within their innocent alabaster arms: Their lips were four red roses on a stalk, Which in their summer beauty kiss'd each other. A book of prayers on their pillow lay; Which once,' quoth Forrest, 'almost changed my mind; But O! the devil'--there the villain stopp'd Whilst Dighton thus told on: 'We smothered The most replenished sweet work of nature, That from the prime creation e'er she framed.' Thus both are gone with conscience and remorse; They could not speak; and so I left them both, To bring this tidings to the bloody king. And here he comes. All hail, my sovereign liege!

VOLUMNIA: Even he, your wife, this lady, and myself, Are suitors to you.

LARTIUS: Hence, and shut your gates upon's. Our guider, come; to the Roman camp conduct us.

VOLUMNIA: Now the red pestilence strike all trades in Rome, And occupations perish!

BRUTUS: Not possible.

BUCKINGHAM: Tut, I can counterfeit the deep tragedian; Speak and look back, and pry on every side, Tremble and start at wagging of a straw, Intending deep suspicion: ghastly looks Are at my service, like enforced smiles; And both are ready in their offices, At any time, to grace my stratagems. But what, is Catesby gone?

Third Citizen: Certainly He flouted us downright.

MENENIUS: What work's, my countrymen, in hand? where go you With bats and clubs? The matter? speak, I pray you.

BRUTUS: We'll hear no more. Pursue him to his house, and pluck him thence: Lest his infection, being of catching nature, Spread further.

Second Senator: 'Tis a spell, you see, of much power: you know the way home again.

BUCKINGHAM: What think'st thou, then, of Stanley? what will he?

PRINCE EDWARD: I thank you, good my lord; and thank you all. I thought my mother, and my brother York, Would long ere this have met us on the way Fie, what a slug is Hastings, that he comes not To tell us whether they will come or no!

First Servingman: A strange one as ever I looked on: I cannot get him out of the house: prithee, call my master to him.

GREY: God keep the prince from all the pack of you! A knot you are of damned blood-suckers!

STANLEY: My lord, I hear the Marquis Dorset's fled To Richmond, in those parts beyond the sea Where he abides.

CORIOLANUS: No more of this; it does offend my heart: Pray now, no more.

DUCHESS OF YORK: Then patiently hear my impatience.

MENENIUS: I neither care for the world nor your general: for such things as you, I can scarce think there's any, ye're so slight. He that hath a will to die by himself fears it not from another: let your general do his worst. For you, be that you are, long; and your misery increase with your age! I say to you, as I was said to, Away!

MENENIUS: The service of the foot Being once gangrened, is not then respected For what before it was.

Third Servingman: How, sir! do you meddle with my master?

COMINIUS: Who shall ask it? The tribunes cannot do't for shame; the people Deserve such pity of him as the wolf Does of the shepherds: for his best friends, if they Should say 'Be good to Rome,' they charged him even As those should do that had deserved his hate, And therein show'd like enemies.

GLOUCESTER: To fight on Edward's party for the crown; And for his meed, poor lord, he is mew'd up. I would to God my heart were flint, like Edward's; Or Edward's soft and pitiful, like mine I am too childish-foolish for this world.

MENENIUS: Well, and say that Marcius Return me, as Cominius is return'd, Unheard; what then? But as a discontented friend, grief-shot With his unkindness? say't be so?

Third Citizen: To lose itself in a fog, where being three parts melted away with rotten dews, the fourth would return for conscience sake, to help to get thee a wife.

GLOUCESTER: Nay, he is dead; and slain by Edward's hand.

CORIOLANUS: Your horror's pardon: I had rather have my wounds to heal again Than hear say how I got them.

Citizens: To the rock, to the rock with him!

KING RICHARD III: Who intercepts my expedition?

KING RICHARD III: Kind Tyrrel, am I happy in thy news?

RIVERS: And so doth mine: I muse why she's at liberty.

MENENIUS: Now, the gods crown thee! Visit our archive for more classic works.

LADY ANNE: I'll rest betide the chamber where thou liest!

BUCKINGHAM: Madam, good hope; his grace speaks cheerfully.

HASTINGS: How! wear the garland! dost thou mean the crown?

CORIOLANUS: You common cry of curs! whose breath I hate As reek o' the rotten fens, whose loves I prize As the dead carcasses of unburied men That do corrupt my air, I banish you; And here remain with your uncertainty! Let every feeble rumour shake your hearts! Your enemies, with nodding of their plumes, Fan you into despair! Have the power still To banish your defenders; till at length Your ignorance, which finds not till it feels, Making not reservation of yourselves, Still your own foes, deliver you as most Abated captives to some nation That won you without blows! Despising, For you, the city, thus I turn my back: There is a world elsewhere.

Messenger: Well, madam, and in health.

GLOUCESTER: Cousin of Buckingham, a word with you. Catesby hath sounded Hastings in our business, And finds the testy gentleman so hot, As he will lose his head ere give consent His master's son, as worshipful as he terms it, Shall lose the royalty of England's throne.

First Servingman: Wine, wine, wine! What service is here! I think our fellows are asleep.

CORIOLANUS: No, take more: What may be sworn by, both divine and human, Seal what I end withal! This double worship, Where one part does disdain with cause, the other Insult without all reason, where gentry, title, wisdom, Cannot conclude but by the yea and no Of general ignorance,--it must omit Real necessities, and give way the while To unstable slightness: purpose so barr'd, it follows, Nothing is done to purpose. Therefore, beseech you,-- You that will be less fearful than discreet, That love the fundamental part of state More than you doubt the change on't, that prefer A noble life before a long, and wish To jump a body with a dangerous physic That's sure of death without it, at once pluck out The multitudinous tongue; let them not lick The sweet which is their poison: your dishonour Mangles true judgment and bereaves the state Of that integrity which should become't, Not having the power to do the good it would, For the in which doth control't.

LADY ANNE: Well, well, put up your sword.

BRAKENBURY: What was your dream? I long to hear you tell it.

CATESBY: 'Tis a vile thing to die, my gracious lord, When men are unprepared and look not for it.

RIVERS: No other harm but loss of such a lord.

CORIOLANUS: Shall remain! Hear you this Triton of the minnows? mark you His absolute 'shall'?

Second Murderer: What, shall we stab him as he sleeps?

VALERIA: In troth, there's wondrous things spoke of him.

Scrivener: This is the indictment of the good Lord Hastings; Which in a set hand fairly is engross'd, That it may be this day read over in Paul's. And mark how well the sequel hangs together: Eleven hours I spent to write it over, For yesternight by Catesby was it brought me; The precedent was full as long a-doing: And yet within these five hours lived Lord Hastings, Untainted, unexamined, free, at liberty Here's a good world the while! Why who's so gross, That seeth not this palpable device? Yet who's so blind, but says he sees it not? Bad is the world; and all will come to nought, When such bad dealings must be seen in thought.

Third Servingman: Where dwellest thou?

First Citizen: Let us kill him, and we'll have corn at our own price. Is't a verdict?

Messenger: Above an hour, my lord.

CARDINAL: My Lord of Buckingham, if my weak oratory Can from his mother win the Duke of York, Anon expect him here; but if she be obdurate To mild entreaties, God in heaven forbid We should infringe the holy privilege Of blessed sanctuary! not for all this land Would I be guilty of so deep a sin.

SICINIUS: Pass no further.

Lord Mayor: See, where he stands between two clergymen!

RIVERS: Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.

CLARENCE: O, do not slander him, for he is kind.

CATESBY: My lord: he doth entreat your grace; To visit him to-morrow or next day: He is within, with two right reverend fathers, Divinely bent to meditation; And no worldly suit would he be moved, To draw him from his holy exercise.

SICINIUS: Thus to have said, As you were fore-advised, had touch'd his spirit And tried his inclination; from him pluck'd Either his gracious promise, which you might, As cause had call'd you up, have held him to Or else it would have gall'd his surly nature, Which easily endures not article Tying him to aught; so putting him to rage, You should have ta'en the advantage of his choler And pass'd him unelected.

LARTIUS: Their noise be our instruction. Ladders, ho!

BRUTUS: Dismiss them home. Here comes his mother.

First Conspirator: Your native town you enter'd like a post, And had no welcomes home: but he returns, Splitting the air with noise.

CORIOLANUS: I wish I had a cause to seek him there, To oppose his hatred fully. Welcome home. Behold, these are the tribunes of the people, The tongues o' the common mouth: I do despise them; For they do prank them in authority, Against all noble sufferance.

VIRGILIA: I am glad to see your ladyship.

Second Murderer: The urging of that word 'judgment' hath bred a kind of remorse in me.

CATESBY: He will do all in all as Hastings doth.

KING RICHARD III: And buried, gentle Tyrrel? Visit our archive for more classic works.

QUEEN ELIZABETH: Here, Hastings; I will never more remember Our former hatred, so thrive I and mine!

Gentleman: My lord, stand back, and let the coffin pass.

MENENIUS: And 'twas time for him too, I'll warrant him that: an he had stayed by him, I would not have been so fidiused for all the chests in Corioli, and the gold that's in them. Is the senate possessed of this?

LADY ANNE: What black magician conjures up this fiend, To stop devoted charitable deeds?

BRAKENBURY: I will, my lord: God give your grace good rest! Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours, Makes the night morning, and the noon-tide night. Princes have but their tides for their glories, An outward honour for an inward toil; And, for unfelt imagination, They often feel a world of restless cares: So that, betwixt their tides and low names, There's nothing differs but the outward fame.

BUCKINGHAM: Think you, my lord, this little prating York Was not incensed by his subtle mother To taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously?

COMINIUS: If! He is their god: he leads them like a thing Made by some other deity than nature, That shapes man better; and they follow him, Against us brats, with no less confidence Than boys pursuing summer butterflies, Or butchers killing flies.

MENENIUS: You have made Good work, you and your cry! Shall's to the Capitol?

GLOUCESTER: To thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace. When have I injured thee? when done thee wrong? Or thee? or thee? or any of your faction? A plague upon you all! His royal person,-- Whom God preserve better than you would wish!-- Cannot be quiet scarce a breathing-while, But you must trouble him with lewd complaints.

RIVERS: By heaven, my heart is purged from grudging hate: And with my hand I seal my true heart's love.

KING RICHARD III: Stanley, look to your wife; if she convey Letters to Richmond, you shall answer it.

COMINIUS: Your temples burned in their cement, and Your franchises, whereon you stood, confined Into an auger's bore.

DUCHESS OF YORK: O Harry's wife, triumph not in my woes! God witness with me, I have wept for thine.

MARCIUS: All the contagion of the south light on you, You shames of Rome! you herd of--Boils and plagues Plaster you o'er, that you may be abhorr'd Further than seen and one infect another Against the wind a mile! You souls of geese, That bear the shapes of men, how have you run From slaves that apes would beat! Pluto and hell! All hurt behind; backs red, and faces pale With flight and agued fear! Mend and charge home, Or, by the fires of heaven, I'll leave the foe And make my wars on you: look to't: come on; If you'll stand fast, we'll beat them to their wives, As they us to our trenches followed. So, now the gates are ope: now prove good seconds: 'Tis for the followers fortune widens them, Not for the fliers: mark me, and do the like.

GLOUCESTER: Welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts' sovereign The weary way hath made you melancholy.

SICINIUS: Why either were you ignorant to see't, Or, seeing it, of such childish friendliness To yield your voices?

VOLUMNIA: Do your will.

All Conspirators: Let him die for't.

VOLUMNIA: This is a poor epitome of yours, Which by the interpretation of full time May show like all yourself.

Pursuivant: God save your lordship!

Second Murderer: So I am, to let him live.

SICINIUS: They say she's mad.

VOLUMNIA: I pray you, daughter, sing; or express yourself in a more comfortable sort: if my son were my husband, I should freelier rejoice in that absence wherein he won honour than in the embracements of his bed where he would show most love. When yet he was but tender-bodied and the only son of my womb, when youth with comeliness plucked all gaze his way, when for a day of kings' entreaties a mother should not sell him an hour from her beholding, I, considering how honour would become such a person. that it was no better than picture-like to hang by the wall, if renown made it not stir, was pleased to let him seek danger where he was like to find fame. To a cruel war I sent him; from whence he returned, his brows bound with oak. I tell thee, daughter, I sprang not more in joy at first hearing he was a man-child than now in first seeing he had proved himself a man.

HASTINGS: I thank thee, good Sir John, with all my heart. I am in your debt for your last exercise; Come the next Sabbath, and I will content you.

SICINIUS: Assemble presently the people hither; And when they bear me say 'It shall be so I' the right and strength o' the commons,' be it either For death, for fine, or banishment, then let them If I say fine, cry 'Fine;' if death, cry 'Death.' Insisting on the old prerogative And power i' the truth o' the cause.

COMINIUS: I tell you, he does sit in gold, his eye Red as 'twould burn Rome; and his injury The gaoler to his pity. I kneel'd before him; 'Twas very faintly he said 'Rise;' dismiss'd me Thus, with his speechless hand: what he would do, He sent in writing after me; what he would not, Bound with an oath to yield to his conditions: So that all hope is vain. Unless his noble mother, and his wife; Who, as I hear, mean to solicit him For mercy to his country. Therefore, let's hence, And with our fair entreaties haste them on.

CORIOLANUS: Tush, tush!

CATESBY: Ay, my good lord.

GLOUCESTER: A blessed labour, my most sovereign liege: Amongst this princely heap, if any here, By false intelligence, or wrong surmise, Hold me a foe; If I unwittingly, or in my rage, Have aught committed that is hardly borne By any in this presence, I desire To reconcile me to his friendly peace: 'Tis death to me to be at enmity; I hate it, and desire all good men's love. First, madam, I entreat true peace of you, Which I will purchase with my duteous service; Of you, my noble cousin Buckingham, If ever any grudge were lodged between us; Of you, Lord Rivers, and, Lord Grey, of you; That without desert have frown'd on me; Dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen; indeed, of all. I do not know that Englishman alive With whom my soul is any jot at odds More than the infant that is born to-night I thank my God for my humility.

CORIOLANUS: Is this done?

Third Servingman: To-morrow; to-day; presently; you shall have the drum struck up this afternoon: 'tis, as it were, a parcel of their feast, and to be executed ere they wipe their lips.

Boy: Tell me, good grandam, is our father dead?

QUEEN MARGARET: And lessen'd be that small, God, I beseech thee! Thy honour, state and seat is due to me.

Third Roman: A murrain on't! I took this for silver.

BRUTUS: Has said enough.